 
U.S. OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT 
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL 
OFFICE OF AUDITS 
Final Audit Report 
FEDERAL INFORMATION SECURITY 
MODERNIZATION ACT AUDIT 
FISCAL YEAR 2020 
Report Number 4A-CI-00-20-010 
October 30, 2020 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Federal Information Security Modernization Act Audit - Fiscal Year 2020 
i 
  Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
October 30, 2020 
Why Did We Conduct the Audit? 
Our overall objective was to evaluate the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management’s 
(OPM) security program and practices, as 
required by the Federal Information 
Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 
2014.  Specifically, we reviewed the status 
of OPM’s information technology security 
program in accordance with the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) 
FISMA Inspector General Reporting 
Metrics. 
What Did We Audit? 
The OPM Office of the Inspector General 
has completed a performance audit of 
OPM’s general FISMA compliance efforts 
in the areas defined in DHS’s guidance and 
the corresponding reporting instructions.  
Our audit was conducted from November 
2019 through August 2020 at OPM 
headquarters in Washington, D.C. 
Michael R. Esser 
Assistant Inspector General for Audits 
What Did We Find? 
The Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 FISMA Inspector General reporting metrics use 
a maturity model evaluation system derived from the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology’s Cybersecurity Framework.  The Cybersecurity 
Framework is comprised of eight “domain” areas and the modes (i.e., the 
number that appears most often) of the domain scores are used to derive the 
agency's overall cybersecurity score.  In FY 2020, OPM's cybersecurity 
maturity level is measured as “2 - Defined.” 
The following sections provide a high-level outline of OPM’s performance 
in each of the eight domains from the five cybersecurity framework 
functional areas: 
Risk Management – OPM has defined an enterprise-wide risk 
management strategy through its risk management council.  OPM is 
working to implement a comprehensive inventory management process 
for its system interconnections, hardware assets, and software. 
Configuration Management – OPM continues to develop baseline 
configurations and approve standard configuration settings for its 
information systems.  The agency is also working to establish routine 
audit processes to ensure that its systems maintain compliance with 
established configurations. 
Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM) – OPM is 
continuing to develop its agency ICAM strategy, and acknowledges a 
need to implement an ICAM program.  However, OPM still does not 
have sufficient processes in place to manage contractors in its 
environment. 
Data Protection and Privacy – OPM has implemented some controls 
related to data protection and privacy.  However, there are still resource 
constraints within OPM’s Office of Privacy and Information 
Management that limit its effectiveness.  
ii 
Security Training – OPM has implemented a security training strategy and program, and has performed a 
workforce assessment, but is still working to address gaps identified in its security training needs. 
Information Security Continuous Monitoring – OPM has established many of the policies and procedures 
surrounding continuous monitoring, but the agency has not completed the implementation and 
enforcement of the policies.  OPM also continues to struggle to conduct security controls assessments on 
all of its information systems. 
Incident Response – OPM has implemented many of the required controls for incident response.  Based 
upon our audit work, OPM has successfully implemented all of the FISMA metrics at the level of 
“consistently implemented” or higher. 
Contingency Planning – OPM has not implemented several of the FISMA requirements related to 
contingency planning, and continues to struggle to maintain its contingency plans as well as conducting 
contingency plan tests on a routine basis. 
iii 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Authorization 
Security Assessment and Authorization 
BIA 
Business Impact Analysis 
CDM 
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation 
CM 
Configuration Management 
DHS 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
ECM 
Enterprise Change Management 
ERM 
Enterprise Risk Management 
FICAM 
Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management 
FISMA 
Federal Information Security Modernization Act 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
ICAM 
Identity, Credential, and Access Management 
IG 
Inspector General 
IOC 
Internal Oversight and Compliance 
ISCM 
Information Security Continuous Monitoring 
ISSO 
Information System Security Officer 
IT 
Information Technology 
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
OCIO 
Office of the Chief Information Officer 
OMB 
U.S. Office of Management and Budget 
OPIM 
Office of Privacy and Information Management 
OPM 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
PII 
Personally Identifiable Information  
PIV 
Personal Identity Verification 
POA&M 
Plan of Action and Milestones 
Q 
Quarter 
SCRM 
Supply Chain Risk Management 
SDLC 
Systems Development Life Cycle 
SP 
Special Publication 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..........................................................................................i 
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................... iii 
I. 
BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................... 1 
II.
OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ................................................... 2
III.
AUDIT FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................. 5
A. 
Introduction and Overall Assessment ................................................................... 5 
B. 
Risk Management ................................................................................................ 6 
C. 
Configuration Management ................................................................................ 19 
D. 
Identity, Credential, and Access Management .................................................... 27 
E. 
Data Protection and Privacy ............................................................................... 33 
F. 
Security Training ............................................................................................... 38 
G. 
Information Security Continuous Monitoring ..................................................... 40 
H. 
Incident Response  ............................................................................................. 46 
I. 
Contingency Planning  ....................................................................................... 48 
APPENDIX I:       Detailed FISMA Results by Metric 
APPENDIX II:     Status of Prior OIG Audit Recommendations 
APPENDIX III:    The Office of Personnel Management’s October 6, 2020, 
response to the draft audit report, issued September 22, 2020. 
REPORT FRAUD, WASTE, AND MISMANAGEMENT 
1 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
I.   BACKGROUND 
The 2002 Federal Information Security Management Act requires (1) annual agency program 
reviews, (2) annual Inspector General (IG) evaluations, (3) agency reporting to the U.S. Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) on the results of IG evaluations for unclassified systems, and 
(4) an annual OMB report to Congress summarizing the material received from agencies.  The 
2014 Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) reemphasizes the need for an 
annual IG evaluation.  In accordance with FISMA, we conducted an audit of the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM)’s security program and practices.  As part of our audit, we 
reviewed OPM’s FISMA compliance strategy and documented the status of its compliance 
efforts. 
FISMA requirements pertain to all information systems supporting the operations and assets of 
an agency, including those systems currently in place or planned.  The requirements also pertain 
to information technology (IT) resources owned and/or operated by a contractor supporting 
agency systems. 
FISMA reaffirms a Chief Information Officer’s strategic agency-wide security responsibility.  At 
OPM, security responsibility is assigned to the agency’s Office of the Chief Information Officer 
(OCIO).  FISMA also clearly places responsibility on each agency’s OCIO to develop, 
implement, and maintain a security program that assesses risk and provides adequate security for 
the operations and assets of programs and systems under its control. 
To assist agencies and IGs in fulfilling their FISMA evaluation and reporting responsibilities, the 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Office of Cybersecurity and Communications 
issued the Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Inspector General FISMA Reporting Instructions.  This 
document provides a consistent methodology and format for agencies to report FISMA audit 
results to DHS.  It identifies a series of reporting topics that relate to specific agency 
responsibilities outlined in FISMA. 
The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency, OMB, and DHS developed 
the FY 2020 FISMA IG Reporting Metrics utilizing a maturity model evaluation system derived 
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework.  Our 
audit and reporting approaches were designed in accordance with the issued guidance. 
2 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
II. OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY
OBJECTIVES 
Our overall objective was to evaluate OPM’s security program and practices, as required by 
FISMA.  Specifically, we reviewed the status of the following areas of OPM’s IT security 
program in accordance with DHS’s FISMA IG reporting requirements: 
• Risk Management;
• Configuration Management;
• Identity, Credential, and Access Management;
• Data Protection and Privacy;
• Security Training;
• Information Security Continuous Monitoring;
• Incident Response; and
• Contingency Planning.
We also followed up on outstanding recommendations from prior FISMA audits, and performed 
audits focused on two set of controls (OPM’s Security Assessment and Authorization process 
and OPM Common Controls process) and one audit of OPM’s major information systems – the 
Electronic Official Personnel Folder. 
SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY 
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office’s Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards.  Those standards require that we 
plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.  We believe that the 
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our 
audit objectives.  The audit covered OPM’s FISMA compliance efforts throughout FY 2020. 
We reviewed OPM’s general FISMA compliance efforts in the specific areas defined in DHS’s 
guidance and the corresponding reporting instructions.  We considered the internal control 
3 
  Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
structure for various OPM systems in planning our audit procedures.  These procedures were 
mainly substantive in nature, although we did gain an understanding of management procedures 
and controls to the extent necessary to achieve our audit objectives.  Accordingly, we obtained 
an understanding of the internal controls for these various systems through interviews and 
observations, as well as inspection of various documents, including information technology and 
other related organizational policies and procedures.  We utilized this understanding to evaluate 
the degree to which the appropriate internal controls were designed and implemented.  As 
appropriate, we conducted compliance tests using judgmental samples to determine the extent to 
which established controls and procedures are functioning as required. 
In conducting our audit, we relied to varying degrees on computer-generated data provided by 
OPM.  Due to time constraints, we did not verify the reliability of the data generated by the 
various information systems involved.  However, we believe that the data was sufficient to 
achieve the audit objectives, and nothing came to our attention during our audit to cause us to 
doubt its reliability. 
Since our audit would not necessarily disclose all significant matters in the internal control 
structure, we do not express an opinion on the set of internal controls for these various systems 
taken as a whole. 
The criteria used in conducting this audit included: 
• DHS Office of Cybersecurity and Communications FY 2020 Inspector General Federal
Information Security Modernization Act Reporting Metrics;
• OPM Information Technology Security and Privacy Policy Handbook;
• OPM Information Technology Security FISMA Procedures;
• OPM Security Assessment and Authorization Guide;
• OPM Plan of Action and Milestones Guide;
• OMB Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource;
• OMB Memorandum M-11-11: Continued Implementation of Homeland Security Presidential
Directive 12;
• P.L. 107-347, Title III, Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002;
4 
  Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
• P.L. 113-283, Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014;
• P.L. 115-390, SECURE Technology Act;
• NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-39, Managing Information Security Risk – Organization,
Mission, and Information System View;
• NIST SP 800-47, Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems;
• NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations;
• Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems;
• Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management Roadmap Implementation Guidance;
• Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015;
• DHS Federal Emergency Management Agency Federal Continuity Directive 1, Federal
Executive Branch National Continuity Program and Requirements; and
• Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual.
The OPM Office of the Inspector General, established by the Inspector General Act of 1978, as 
amended, performed the audit from November 2019 through August 2020 in OPM’s 
Washington, D.C. office. 
COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND REGULATIONS 
In conducting the audit, we performed tests to determine whether OPM’s practices were 
consistent with applicable standards.  While generally compliant, with respect to the items tested, 
OPM’s OCIO and other program offices were not in complete compliance with all standards, as 
described in Section III of this report. 
 
Configuration 
Management 
Maturity Level: 2
Identity and 
Access 
Management
Maturity Level: 3
Information 
Security 
Continuous 
Monitoring 
Maturity Level: 2
Incident 
Response
Maturity Level: 4
Contingency 
Planning
Maturity Level: 2
Data 
Protection 
and Privacy
Maturity Level: 1
Respond 
Maturity Level:
4 – Managed and 
Measurable
OPM 
Overall Cybersecurity Program 
Maturity Level: 2 - Defined
Risk 
Management 
Maturity Level: 1
Security 
Training 
Maturity Level: 4
Detect 
Maturity Level:
2 – Defined
Recover 
Maturity Level:
2 – Defined
Identify 
Maturity Level:
1 – Ad Hoc
Protect 
Maturity Level:
3 – Consistently 
Implemented
5 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
III. AUDIT FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A. INTRODUCTION AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT 
The FY 2020 FISMA IG Reporting Metrics use a maturity model evaluation system derived 
from the NIST Cybersecurity Framework.  The Cybersecurity Framework is comprised of five 
“function” areas that map to the eight “domains” under the function areas.  These eight domains 
are broad cybersecurity control areas used to assess the effectiveness of the information security 
policies, procedures, and practices of the agency.  Each domain is comprised of a series of 
individual metrics, which are the specific controls that we evaluate and test when assessing the 
agency’s cybersecurity program.  Each metric receives a maturity level rating of 1-5.  The chart 
below outlines the overall maturity of OPM’s cybersecurity program. 
The following table outlines the description of each maturity level rating, as defined by the    
FY 2020 IG FISMA Reporting Metrics: 
Maturity Level 
Maturity Level Description 
Level 1: Ad-hoc 
Policies, procedures, and strategy are not formalized; activities 
are performed in an ad-hoc, reactive manner. 
Level 2: Defined 
Policies, procedures, and strategy are formalized and 
documented but not consistently implemented. 
Level 3: Consistently 
Policies, procedures, and strategy are consistently 
Implemented 
implemented, but quantitative and qualitative effectiveness 
measures are lacking. 
6 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Level 4: Managed and 
Quantitative and qualitative measures on the effectiveness of 
Measureable 
policies, procedures, and strategy are collected across the 
organization and used to assess them and make necessary 
changes. 
Level 5: Optimized 
Policies, procedures, and strategy are fully institutionalized, 
repeatable, self-generating, consistently implemented, and 
regularly updated based on a changing threat and technology 
landscape and business/mission needs. 
The mode (i.e., the number that appears most often) from the maturity levels of each individual 
metric is used to determine the corresponding domain rating and in the event of a tie between 
maturity levels the higher level is used.  Similarly, the mode from the domain ratings assigns the 
function area rating.  We calculated the overall agency rating using the same methodology.  
However, IGs have discretion in the function and agency ratings to consider agency specific 
factors. 
The remaining sections of this report provide the detailed results of our audit.  Sections B 
through I outline how we rated the maturity level of each individual metric, which ultimately 
determined the agency’s maturity level for each domain and function. 
B. RISK MANAGEMENT 
Risk management controls are the tools, policies, and procedures that enable an organization to 
understand and control risks associated with its IT infrastructure and services.  These controls 
should be implemented throughout the agency and used to support making risk-based decisions 
with limited resources.  The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in this 
domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Risk Management domain is “1 – Ad-hoc.” 
Metric 1 – Inventory of Major Systems and System Interconnections 
FY2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM has policies and procedures for maintaining an 
inventory of information systems.  These require an interconnection service agreement or 
memoranda of understanding to be established for system interconnections.  OPM operates a 
centrally maintained tool for managing its system inventory and information.  
7 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Although OPM has established a requirement to define system boundaries, a documented 
process for defining system boundaries does not exist.  OPM is piloting a program update to its 
system registrations, which may include changes to the boundary definition process.  However, 
the scope and timeline for the program are still not defined.  Additionally, nine major 
information systems have a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) to establish the 
appropriate interconnection agreements. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, advises that an organization “develops and maintains an inventory 
of its information systems.”  Furthermore, NIST requires that an organization “Documents, for 
each interconnection, the interface characteristics, security requirements, and the nature of the 
information communicated . . .” and regularly reviews, updates, and authorizes each connection. 
Failure to consistently define and document system boundary and interconnection information 
increases the risk that OPM senior management does not have adequate system information to 
determine and identify risk. 
Recommendation 1 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM improve the policies and procedures for defining system boundaries 
and classifying the systems in its environment. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with the recommendation.  OPM updated its process for defining system 
boundaries in FY 2020 to align with NIST SP800-37 Revision 2.  We implemented a pilot of 
our process changes in FY 2020 [Quarter (Q)]2 and completed it in FY 2020 Q3.  With the 
successful completion of the pilot we implemented these changes in production for several 
systems.  A briefing was held at that time with OPM Information System Security Managers to 
outline the changes to the process and convey the updates to the forms being used.  We are 
able to provide the relevant documentation upon OIG request.” 
OIG Comment: 
During fieldwork discussions in FY 2020 Q3, OPM indicated that the pilot program was still in 
progress.  In FY 2020 Q4, OPM responded to the Notice of Finding and Recommendation for 
this issue stating that progress was being made and offered to provide updates, as available.  
However, no updated documentation or evidence was subsequently provided.  If OPM has 
updated the policies and procedures for defining system boundaries and classifying the 
information systems in its environment, we recommend that as part of the audit resolution 
8 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
process OPM provide OPM’s Internal Oversight and Compliance (IOC) office with evidence that 
the agency implemented this recommendation. 
Recommendation 2 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that OPM ensure that all interconnection security agreements are valid and 
properly maintained. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide sufficient 
Information System Security Officer (ISSO) support through the ISSO service model.  We 
believe the ISSOs, when appropriately staffed and funded, will be able to address the 
development and maintenance of interconnection security agreements.” 
OIG Comment: 
As part of the audit resolution process, we recommend that OPM provide IOC with evidence that 
the agency implemented this recommendation. 
This statement applies to all subsequent recommendations in this audit report that the OCIO 
agrees to implement. 
Recommendation 3 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that OPM ensure that a valid memorandum of understanding/agreement exists 
for every interconnection. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide sufficient 
ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when appropriately 
staffed and funded, will be able to address the development and maintenance of 
interconnection security agreements.” 
Metric 2 – Hardware Inventory 
FY2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM’s Security Authorization Guide says that in order to 
register OPM systems, hardware assets included in its system boundary are documented and 
electronically maintained.  However, OPM does not have a defined process to maintain its 
9 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
inventory of hardware assets.  As a result, hardware inventory does not contain adequate 
information including location, serial numbers, and system owners.  Currently, OPM is working 
on a project to implement DHS’s Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program that will 
include tools to detect hardware.  However, the project has not been completed, and the DHS 
program does not include contractor owned or operated systems. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, states that organizations with centralized inventories must “ensure 
that the resulting inventories include system-specific information required for proper component 
accountability (e.g., information system association and information system owner).” 
Failure to maintain adequate hardware inventory elements increases the risk that system support 
will be adversely affected.  In addition, failure to associate components of a hardware inventory 
with the specific information system(s) they support increases the risk that there will not be 
proper accountability for the component or system owner. 
Recommendation 4 (Rolled forward from 2019) 
We recommend that OPM define the procedures for maintaining its hardware inventory. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We will aim to update procedures for maintaining the 
OPM hardware inventory.” 
Recommendation 5 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
We recommend that OPM improve its system inventory by correlating the elements of the 
inventory to the servers and information systems they reside on. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has met part of this requirement by purchasing 
and leveraging toolsets provided by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Continuous 
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program.  Also, OPM is in the process of entering FISMA 
system boundaries into its CDM toolset which will enable mapping of all assets to a FISMA 
system and inventory reporting capabilities within the OPM CDM Dashboard.” 
10 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 3 – Software Inventory 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM has a policy that 
requires software components to be inventoried.  However, a 
documented process to maintain software inventory is still not 
in place.  Defining data elements to include in a software 
inventory would improve OPM’s tracking of software in its 
environment.  Further, instances of unsupported software were found during our testing.  OPM 
purchased a tool this year that when implemented could address these concerns. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, states that organizations with centralized inventories must “ensure 
that the resulting inventories include system-specific information required for proper component 
accountability (e.g., information system association and information system owner).  Information 
deemed necessary for effective accountability of information system components includes, for 
example, hardware inventory specifications, software license information, software version 
numbers, component owners, and for networked components or devices, machine names and 
network addresses.  Inventory specifications include, for example, manufacturer, device type, 
model, serial number, and physical location.” 
Failure to maintain a centralized software inventory increases the risk that the agency will not 
fully understand the information assets in its environment.  This increases the agency’s 
susceptibility to unassessed risks and undetected vulnerabilities since agency officials are 
authorizing systems without a complete understanding of the included components. 
Recommendation 6 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM define policies and procedures for a centralized software inventory. 
Note:  While OPM has defined a policy requiring a centralized software inventory, this 
recommendation remains open, as the agency has not developed the procedures. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We plan to expand the OPM Enterprise Change 
Management (ECM) program, enhance the software inventory, and evaluate the associated 
reporting and procedures.  Plans to utilize the recently procured Software Asset Management 
tool have been outlined, and we are in the process of implementing the tool.  We are targeting 
the development of detailed plans in FY 2021, contingent upon continued resources and 
funding at the current or increased levels.” 
OPM does not have 
documented 
procedures for 
maintaining its 
software inventory. 
11 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 7 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM define the standard data elements for an inventory of software assets 
and licenses with the detailed information necessary for tracking and reporting, and that it update 
its software inventory to include these standard data elements. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  Provided that OCIO resources remain at least at the 
current levels, we will continue to improve upon the agency’s enterprise architecture in FY 
2021, specifically regarding the agency software inventory.  Subject to available resources, we 
will first reevaluate the current posture and then develop the remediation plan.” 
Recommendation 8 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
We recommend that OCIO implement a process to ensure that only supported software operating 
platforms are used within the network environment. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The ECM program and processes require approval for 
software installation.  Additionally, any time new software is installed on a device, OPM is 
able to detect the installation.  We are also actively developing plans to remove unsupported 
software and operating platforms from the network.” 
Metric 4 – System Security Categorization 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has implemented policies and 
procedures for categorizing its information and information systems that follow Federal 
Information Processing Standard 199 and NIST SP 800-60 guidance.  This includes the 
identification of the agency’s high value assets and consideration of the system categorization 
when selecting, implementing, and monitoring controls. 
Metric 5 – Risk Policy and Strategy 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM’s Risk Management and Internal Controls Council 
manages the Enterprise Risk Management program.  The Council meets regularly to discuss 
various risk topics and update the agencies risk profile.  However, OPM has not incorporated 
supply chain risk management (SCRM) in its risk strategies.  OPM has identified funding as an 
issue in developing an action plan to address supply chain requirements. 
12 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
The SECURE Technology Act, enacted in December 2018, states, “The head of each executive 
agency shall be responsible for (1) assessing the supply chain risk posed by the acquisition and 
use of covered articles and avoiding, mitigating, accepting, or transferring that risk, as 
appropriate and consistent with the standards, guidelines, and practices identified by the Council 
under section 1323(a)(1); and (2) prioritizing supply chain risk assessments conducted under 
paragraph (1) based on the criticality of the mission, system, component, service, or asset.” 
NIST SP 800-161 outlines how to incorporate SCRM into an agency risk management process.  
This includes adjusting the security controls that the agency has implemented.  “The 
[information and communications technology] SCRM controls defined in this chapter should be 
selected and tailored according to individual organization needs and environment using the 
guidance in [NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4], in order to ensure a cost-effective, risk-based 
approach to providing [Information and Communication Technology] SCRM organization-
wide.”  It also adds a family of controls “Provenance . . . developed specifically to address 
[information and communications technology] supply chain concerns.” 
Failure to assess supply chain risks increases the risk that OPM will not be able to procure the 
necessary resources in an effective and security conscious manner, which could result in a 
malicious vulnerability being introduced into the agency’s technical environment. 
Recommendation 9 (Rolled forward from 2019) 
We recommend that OPM develop an action plan and outline its processes to address the supply 
chain risk management requirements of NIST SP 800-161. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OPM will continue to follow government-wide 
guidance and standards to address this recommendation.  OPM’s Risk Management Council 
is awaiting additional guidance from the Federal Acquisition Security Committee, in order to 
develop a comprehensive strategy and plans.” 
Metric 6 – Information Security Architecture 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM has guidance for implementing an information 
security architecture.  The information security architecture is meant to be a plan for the 
implementation of security mechanisms.  OPM’s Enterprise Architecture has not been updated 
since 2008, and it does not contain a Security Reference Model, which represents the agency’s 
information security architecture.  OPM also has an Enterprise Information Security 
Architecture, however the document is in draft form. 
13 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, defines an information security architecture as “An embedded, 
integral part of the enterprise architecture that describes the structure and behavior for an 
enterprise’s security processes, information security systems, personnel and organizational 
subunits, showing their alignment with the enterprise’s mission and strategic plans.”  It also 
states, “The integration of information security requirements and associated security controls into 
the organization’s enterprise architecture helps to ensure that security considerations are 
addressed by organizations early in the system development life cycle and are directly and 
explicitly related to the organization’s mission/business processes.” 
Failure to maintain an enterprise architecture with an integrated information security architecture 
increases the risks that the agency’s security processes, systems, and personnel are not aligned 
with the agency mission and strategic plan. 
Recommendation 10 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM update its enterprise architecture, to include the information security 
architecture elements required by NIST and OMB guidance. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We will continue to update the enterprise architecture 
including the necessary information system security architecture.  Contingent upon continued 
resources and funding at the current or increased levels, we are also targeting to hire an 
Enterprise Architect.” 
Metric 7 – Risk Management Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM’s Cyber Risk Management 
Strategy defines the roles and responsibilities including the risk management council, chief 
information security officer, and information system security officers (ISSO).  Policies at OPM 
provide requirements for risk assessments, response, and continuous monitoring. 
ISSOs are responsible for conducting risk assessments, developing risk response, and monitoring 
risk activities of OPM’s information systems, as well as addressing some long-standing 
recommendations.  However, OPM continues to struggle to address long-standing 
recommendations.  We were told that turnover within the OCIO is an on-going issue.  OCIO has 
performed gap analysis assessments to address the issue.  However, challenges in obtaining all of 
the necessary approvals in the hiring process has hindered efforts in addressing the identified 
gaps. 
14 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Failure to have a mature and consistent IT security program increases the risk that the 
information systems and environment at OPM will not meet the necessary business requirements 
for confidentiality, availability, and integrity. 
Recommendation 11 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
We recommend that the OPM Director ensure that the OCIO has sufficient resources to 
adequately operate, secure, and modernize agency IT systems. 
We also recommend that the agency hire a sufficient number of ISSOs to adequately support all 
of the agency’s major information systems. 
OPM Response: 
“We note that for the Director to be in a position to ensure such an outcome, Congress must 
provide adequate resources and OMB must allocate them.  Subject to that caveat, we concur 
with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide sufficient ISSO support 
through the ISSO service model.  We also recognize that ISSOs alone are not sufficient to 
adequately operate, secure, and modernize agency IT systems.  When appropriately staffed 
and funded, OPM will work to execute this recommendation remediation.” 
Metric 8 – Plan of Action and Milestones 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  POA&Ms are a record of 
identified weaknesses in OPM information systems controls and 
are used to track remediation efforts.  OPM’s OCIO has now 
prioritized POA&Ms, and stated that a new reporting feature in 
the POA&M repository alerts system owners of past due 
POA&Ms.  As of July 31, 2020, we still noted the following 
issues: 
•
60 percent of open POA&Ms are past due;
•
55 percent have not been updated in over a year; and
•
11 percent have not been updated in three years.
Tracking, updating, remediating, and closing POA&Ms are vital to diagnosing a system’s level 
of risk, which impacts how that system affects the overall risk to OPM.  Without up-to-date 
More than half of 
OPM’s open 
POA&Ms have not 
been updated in over 
a year. 
15 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
POA&Ms, OPM is unable to make effective risk-based decisions and distribute resources 
efficiently to address risk. 
Recommendation 12 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
We recommend that OPM adhere to remediation dates for its POA&M weaknesses. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has instituted new metrics and processes for 
reviewing the completion of its POA&Ms which allows for timely awareness of slippage in the 
POA&M, allowing for corrective action.  While we are checking on some potential 
implementation issues with our tracking tool, we are also manually addressing our POA&Ms.  
Once any identified issues are addressed, we will be able to provide a more accurate reporting 
of our POA&M status.” 
Recommendation 13 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM update the remediation deadline in its POA&Ms when the control 
weakness has not been addressed by the originally scheduled deadline (i.e., the POA&M 
deadline should not reflect a date in the past, and the original due should be maintained to track 
the schedule variance). 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has instituted new metrics and processes for 
reviewing the completion of its POA&Ms which provides for timely awareness of slippage in 
the POA&M, allowing for corrective action.  While we are checking on some potential 
implementation issues with our tracking tool, we are also manually addressing our POA&Ms 
and will update the deadlines while working them.  Once any identified issues are addressed, 
we will be able to provide a more accurate reporting of our POA&M status.” 
Metric 9 – System Level Risk Assessments 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined policies and procedures for conducting 
risk assessments on information systems.  OPM policy requires that risk assessments be 
performed periodically, and appropriate response actions be taken to effectively manage risks 
that have been identified.  In 2020, OPM began a project to document the system-level risk 
assessments in a consistent manner with enterprise wide risk assessments.  All new systems will 
participate in this new process, and existing systems will follow when their annual reviews 
16 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
occur.  However, we have yet to receive any evidence from OPM to indicate that the OCIO’s 
new process to perform risk assessments has been implemented. 
OPM policy requires, “All controls selected by the system . . . are assessed” and that “an 
assessment of the risk to the system for each weakness is performed.” 
Failure to assess all system controls and system risks increases the possibility that weaknesses 
will not be identified in the system controls or that the information will not be incorporated when 
determining whether a system is authorized to operate. 
Recommendation 14 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM complete risk assessments for each major information system that are 
compliant with NIST guidelines and OPM policy.  The results of a complete and comprehensive 
test of security controls should be incorporated into each risk assessment. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide sufficient 
ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when appropriately 
staffed and funded, will be able to address these concerns.” 
Metric 10 – Risk Communication 
FY2020 Maturity Level: 3 – Consistently implemented.  It is the responsibility of the ISSO to 
discuss risk assessment results with the:  System Owner, Authorizing Official, and Chief 
Information Security Officer.  This ensures that information about risks discovered through risk 
assessments are communicated to all necessary stakeholders in a timely manner.  Therefore, 
OPM is able reduce and potentially eliminate known vulnerabilities in the system through timely 
communication of risk. 
Metric 11 – Contracting Clauses 
FY2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently implemented.  Policies in place at OPM require the use 
of specific contract language and service level agreements to ensure contractors meet both 
Federal and OPM specific standards.  Contractors must adhere to required contract language 
including privacy and security requirements. 
17 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 12 – Centralized Enterprise-wide Risk Tool 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM does not have a centralized and automated tool to 
view risk information at the enterprise level.  Currently, OPM uses a spreadsheet to track data 
element requirements of OMB A-123 along with the Enterprise Rise Management playbook.  
Without a centralized enterprise-wide tool in place at OPM, it is more difficult to understand and 
determine enterprise-wide risks. 
NIST SP 800-39 states that automated monitoring, “should be employed because it is generally 
faster, more efficient, and more cost-effective than manual monitoring.  Automated monitoring is 
also less prone to human error.” 
Failure to implement a centralized, automated, enterprise-wide risk management tool increases 
the risk that information is not captured, current, and/or not being assessed in aggregate. 
Recommendation 15 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM identify and define the requirements for an automated enterprise-wide 
solution for tracking risks, remediation efforts, dependencies, risk scores, and management 
dashboards, and implement the automated enterprise-wide solution. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation but believe that no further action will be required based 
on the information provided in this response.  The Chief Financial Officer’s, Office of Risk 
Management and Internal Controls manages and oversees the agency’s Enterprise Risk 
Management (ERM) program in accordance with the Office of Management and Budget’s 
(OMB) Circular A-123.  This oversight includes the capture, scoring, calibration, 
prioritization, and monitoring of risks and risk mitigation strategies.  Currently, [the Office of 
Risk Management and Internal Controls] manages the agency’s enterprise risk profile and 
multiple program specific, risk registers.  The tracking of risks, remediation efforts, and risk 
scores is maintained in an automated scoring framework using Microsoft Excel software.  The 
agency scores and tracks risks and risk mitigation efforts based on the recommended criteria 
in OMB Circular A-123.  A copy of the risk profile/automated risk tool was provided to Mr.  
, of OPM’s Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Information Systems Audit Group, 
on July 16, 2020.  OPM finds its current automated system sufficient to manage the agency’s 
ERM program, as do many agencies government wide who utilize a similar framework to 
support their ERM efforts.  We believe that the current automation tool allows OPM to 
manage risk information sufficiently, determine risk prioritization through aggregated 
18 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
scoring, and provide management with the information it needs to develop a greater 
understanding of agency wide risk based on a strategic review of cross departmental risks. 
The current tool includes the following attributes: 1) description of the risk; 2) source of the 
risk; 3) date the risk was identified; 4) aggregated risk impact score; 5) aggregated risk 
likelihood score; 6) overall risk score; 7) exposure rating; 8) targeted residual risk score; 9) 
identified risk mitigation owners; 10) the risk response plan; and 11) post risk mitigation 
scoring and exposure ratings.  Combined with the monthly meetings of the agency’s ERM 
governance body, the Risk Management Council, this tool provides agency leaders with an 
organization-wide forum to consider all types and sources of risk and prioritize them based on 
aggregated and calibrated scoring methodologies.  We believe that the current tool 
demonstrates that risk information is captured, current, and being assessed in aggregate.” 
OIG Comment: 
OPM continues to use the same process from prior years for inputting and updating risk 
information.  On July 16, 2020, OPM provided us with a PDF copy of its risk register.  However, 
this document does not show that the agency has implemented an automated enterprise-wide 
solution for collecting, processing, and displaying risk information. 
In response to this recommendation last year, OPM concurred and acknowledged its goal of 
implementing such an automated system stating, “It was and it is still OCFO's goal to implement 
an automated solution to manage its enterprise risk management program.  In FY 2020, the CFO 
will direct Risk Management and Internal Control (RMIC) to update its plan for the 
implementation of an ERM solution post transition-related priorities and budget uncertainties.”   
However, if OPM believes that the automated Microsoft Excel spreadsheet referenced above 
satisfies the intent of this metric and associated recommendation, it should submit a request for 
closure package to IOC along with relevant evidence.  
Metric 13 – Risk Management Other Information – System Development Life Cycle 
The last update of OPM’s System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) policy occurred in 2013, and 
the policy has still yet to be enforced by the agency for all OPM system development projects.  
The OCIO responded to the FY 2019 audit recommendation by concurring with the need to 
enforce its SDLC policy on all IT projects.  However, we were also informed by the OCIO that 
no changes have been made to address this on-going issue. 
The Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual guidance states that “The SDLC should 
provide a structured approach for identifying and documenting needed changes to computerized 
operations; assessing the costs and benefits of various options, including the feasibility of using 
19 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
off-the-shelf software; and designing, developing, testing, and approving new systems and 
system modifications.” 
The absence of a consistent SDLC methodology increases the risk that OPM will waste resources 
on system development projects that will not meet the needs and/or requirements of the agency.  
It also increases the likelihood that adequate IT security controls are not built into a new system 
during the development process, resulting in a potentially insecure system. 
Recommendation 16 (Rolled forward from 2013) 
We continue to recommend that the OCIO develop a plan and timeline to enforce the new SDLC 
policy on all of OPM’s system development projects. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We recognize the need to enforce SDLC policy on all 
IT projects and plan to implement corrective actions when we can support such activities 
based upon resources and funding.” 
C. CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT 
Configuration Management (CM) controls allow an organization to establish information system 
configuration baselines, processes for securely managing changes to configurable settings, and 
procedures for monitoring system software.  The sections below detail the results for each 
individual metric in this domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Configuration 
Management domain is “2 – Defined.” 
Metric 14 – Configuration Management Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has policies and procedures in place defining CM 
stakeholders and their roles and responsibilities.  However, OPM has indicated that it does not 
currently have adequate processes and technology to manage its CM program effectively.  
Additionally, OPM has not allocated the appropriate resources to perform a gap analysis that 
would assist in identifying areas of concern. 
NIST SP 800-128 states that “For organizations with varied and complex enterprise architecture, 
implementing [CM] in a consistent and uniform manner across the organization requires 
organization-wide coordination of resources.” 
20 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Without adequate resources to manage CM operations, there is an increased risk of improperly 
configured devices on the network, and an increased threat of malicious attacks. 
Recommendation 17 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM perform a gap analysis to determine the configuration management 
resource requirements (people, processes, and technology) necessary to effectively implement 
the agency’s CM program. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We will work to define and obtain the resource 
requirements to improve the configuration management program.  When we are able to secure 
funding and resources, we will work to execute this recommendation remediation.” 
Metric 15 – Configuration Management Plan 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has developed a CM plan that outlines CM-related 
roles and responsibilities, institutes a change control board, and defines processes for 
implementing configuration changes.  However, OPM has not established a process to document 
lessons learned from its change control process. 
NIST SP 800-128 states that “An information system is composed of many components . . . . 
How these system components are networked, configured, and managed is critical in providing 
adequate information security and supporting an organization’s risk management process.” 
Failure to document lessons learned increases the risk that the configuration management process 
will not effectively manage the system security settings that protect the OPM environment. 
Recommendation 18 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM document the lessons learned from its configuration management 
activities and update its configuration management plan as appropriate. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with this recommendation.  The Enterprise Change Management Group 
prepares a report to track improvements to the ECM program and process based on lessons 
learned.  ECM captures the issues, makes observations, and documents the lessons learned.  
In addition, it captures mitigations taken.  Thus, we believe that there is already a successful 
21 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
process in place to document lessons learned with regard to configuration management 
activities.” 
OIG Comment: 
OPM’s response to the FY 2019 FISMA Draft Report for the same recommendation stated that 
this recommendation was inappropriate and not timely.  OPM’s response stated specifically that 
the recommendation could not be addressed until the gap analysis from the prior 
recommendation was completed and a mature CM program fully established at OPM.  At no 
point during the course of this year’s audit or in its response to the Notification of Finding and 
Recommendation has OPM provided policies or procedures that document the lessons learned 
process.  If OPM believes that it has implemented the recommendation, then as part of the audit 
resolution process we recommend that the OCIO provide IOC with evidence that the agency has 
implemented this recommendation. 
Metric 16 – Implementation of Policies and Procedures 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined agency-wide CM policies and 
procedures, but has not consistently implemented many of the controls outlined in these policies, 
such as: 
•
Establishing and maintaining baseline configurations and inventories of information systems;
•
Routinely verifying that information systems are actually configured in accordance with
baseline configurations; and
•
Conducting routine vulnerability scans on all information systems and remediating any
vulnerabilities identified from the scan results in a timely manner.
Further details regarding these weaknesses are discussed in Metrics 17, 18, and 19, below. 
Metric 17 – Baseline Configurations 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-hoc.  OPM has not developed a 
baseline configuration for all of its information systems.  NIST 
SP 800-53, Revision 4, states that “Baseline configurations are 
documented, formally reviewed and agreed-upon sets of 
specifications for information systems.  Baseline configurations 
serve as a basis for future builds, releases, and/or changes to 
OPM has not 
developed a baseline 
configuration for all 
of its information 
systems. 
22 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
information systems.  Baseline configurations include information about information system 
components (e.g., standard software packages installed on workstations, notebook computers, 
servers, network components, or mobile devices; current version numbers and patch information 
on operating systems and applications; and configuration settings/parameters), network topology, 
and the logical placement of those components within the system architecture.” 
OPM routinely runs automated compliance scans on its information systems to ensure that no 
system configurations are modified outside of the approved change control process.  However, 
OPM does not currently run baseline configuration checks to verify that information systems are 
in compliance with pre-established baseline configurations, as they have yet to be developed. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, advises that an organization “develops, documents, [and] maintains 
under configuration control, a current baseline configuration of the information system.” 
Failure to document a baseline configuration increases the risk that devices within the network 
are not configured in accordance with agency policies and leaves them vulnerable to malicious 
attacks that exploit those misconfigurations. 
Recommendation 19 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM develop and implement a baseline configuration for all information 
systems in use by OPM. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We are working toward development and 
implementation of the standard configuration settings for all OPM information systems.  We 
will work to implement the standard configuration settings for new deployments of operating 
platforms through enhancements to its Enterprise Configuration Management process in the 
upcoming fiscal year, based upon funding.” 
Recommendation 20 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct routine compliance scans against established baseline 
configurations for all OPM information systems.   
Note: This recommendation cannot be addressed until recommendation 19 has been 
implemented. 
23 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We plan to expand the OPM ECM program to include 
baseline configuration compliance.  We are also considering the feasibility of expanding our 
change management process to a configuration management process.  With additional 
funding and resources, we will reevaluate the current posture and then develop the 
remediation plan[.]  We will continue to conduct routine compliance scans while adding OPM 
information systems as is appropriate.” 
Metric 18 – Security Configuration Settings 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-Hoc.  OPM uses the Defense Information Systems Agency’s 
Security Technical Implementation Guides as the basis for its configuration settings.  However, 
OPM has not consistently implemented the process for documenting and approving exceptions, 
which means OPM has not customized the configuration settings for its systems and 
environment.  As a result, testing against the Guides is not effective since OPM has not 
documented the allowed deviations. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, defines configuration settings as “the set of parameters that can be 
changed in hardware, software, or firmware components of the information system that affect the 
security posture and/or functionality of the system.”  It also states, “Security-related parameters 
are those parameters impacting the security state of information systems including the 
parameters required to satisfy other security control requirements.  Security-related parameters 
include, for example: (i) registry settings; (ii) account, file, directory permission settings; and 
(iii) settings for functions, ports, protocols, services, and remote connections.” 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, requires that the organization “Establishes and documents 
configuration settings for information technology products employed within the information 
system . . . that reflect the most restrictive mode consistent with operational requirements . . . .” 
Failure to document standard configuration settings for all information systems increases the risk 
of insecurely configured systems.  As noted above, without formally documented and approved 
configuration settings, OPM cannot effectively run automated scans to verify that information 
systems maintain compliance with the pre-established configuration settings.  Routine 
compliance scanning ensures that the configuration is not changed after initial implementation of 
security settings, which is a vital step to maintain a secure environment. 
Recommendation 21 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the OCIO develop and implement [standard security configuration settings] 
for all operating platforms in use by OPM. 
24 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We developed the standard security configuration 
settings for all OPM operating platforms.  We will work towards implementing the standard 
security configuration settings for new deployments of operating platforms through 
enhancements to its Enterprise Configuration Management process in the upcoming fiscal 
year.” 
Recommendation 22 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct routine compliance scans against [the standard security 
configuration settings] for all servers and databases in use by OPM.   
Note: This recommendation cannot be addressed until Recommendation 21 above has been 
completed. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We will aim to conduct routine compliance scans 
against the standard security configuration settings as part of our Enterprise Configuration 
Management process updates.” 
Recommendation 23 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
For OPM configuration standards that are based on a pre-existing generic standard, we 
recommend that OPM document all instances where the OPM-specific standard deviates from 
the recommended configuration setting. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide sufficient 
ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when appropriately 
staffed and funded, will be able to address these concerns.” 
Metric 19 – Flaw Remediation and Patch Management 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM routinely performs automated vulnerability and 
patch compliance scans on its systems.  As a part of our audit testing, we reviewed vulnerability 
scan results for approximately 120 servers from OPM's server inventory.  Our test work indicates 
that several problems previously identified still exist: 
25 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
•
OPM is not consistently installing all patches in a timely manner; some of the missing
patches date back to 2018.
•
OPM does not have a formal process to ensure all new devices in the environment are
included in the scanning process.  We also determined that not every device on OPM’s
network is scanned routinely.
•
OPM does not have a process to record or track the remediation status for routine security
weaknesses identified during vulnerability scans.  While the agency does distribute
vulnerability scan results to system owners to remediate identified weaknesses, formal
POA&M entries are only created for weaknesses that require significant time to remediate.
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, advises that an organization “Scans for vulnerabilities in the 
information system and hosted applications . . .” and that the organization “Identifies, reports, 
corrects information system flaws . . .” and “Installs security-relevant software and firmware 
updates . . . .” 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, states that the organization should implement privileged access 
authorization for vulnerability scanning activities.  “Privileged access authorization to selected 
system components facilitates more thorough vulnerability scanning and also protects the 
sensitive nature of such scanning.” 
Without a formal process to scan and track known vulnerabilities, there is a significantly 
increased risk that systems will indefinitely remain susceptible to attack. 
Recommendation 24 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to ensure routine vulnerability scanning is 
conducted on all network devices documented within the inventory. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  The process and requirements include the immediate 
inclusion of the device into OPM’s routine scanning repository.  OPM controls all devices that 
are connecting to the network.  OPM will establish plans to produce evidence to support 
closure of this recommendation in FY 2021 Q1.” 
26 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 25 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to centrally track the current status of 
security weaknesses identified during vulnerability scans to remediation or risk acceptance. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with this recommendation.  OPM already maintains procedures for 
conducting vulnerability scans and capturing those results in the Plan of Action and 
Milestones (POA&M).  OPM's policies and procedures with regards to vulnerability 
management and POA&M management require the application of fixes to identified security 
flaws within a specified time frame consistent with NIST standards and guidelines.  If security 
fixes are not applied within that time frame, then these controls are determined not to be 
operating effectively as designed and a POA&M is created to manage the remediation of those 
flaws that were not fixed in a timely manner.  Allowing a time to remediate flaws before a 
POA&M is created is consistent with NIST standards and guidelines and OMB policy.” 
OIG Comment: 
OPM’s policies on scanning have not been updated since 2016, but they do identify that risks are 
to be documented in POA&Ms if they cannot be fixed in a timely manner.  However, historically 
this process has not been applied to all vulnerabilities identified in scanning.  OPM’s response to 
the FY 2019 FISMA Draft Report for this same recommendation concurred with the finding and 
identified that along with numerous other recommendations, remediation of this recommendation 
was dependent on having a sufficient number of ISSOs.  OPM continues to cite ISSO staffing 
issues in numerous other responses in this report as an ongoing problem.  We were not able to 
validate that this process was operating effectively during the audit.  If OPM believes that all 
vulnerabilities that cannot be remediated in a timely manner are documented in POA&Ms, then 
as part of the audit resolution process, we recommend that OPM provide IOC with evidence that 
the agency has implemented this recommendation. 
Recommendation 26 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to apply operating system and third party 
vendor patches in a timely manner. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO has a process for patch management to 
facilitate the timely deployment of patches.  Going forward, OCIO will work to improve 
27 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
consistency in the patch management processes through improved data collection and 
strategic process implementation.” 
Recommendation 27 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to ensure new server installations are 
included in the scan repository. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  The process to ensure new server installations are 
included on the scan repository, via the ECM, has been developed and is being documented.  
OPM’s full implementation will be completed based upon resources and funding.” 
Metric 20 – Trusted Internet Connection Program 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has defined and implemented 
controls to monitor and manage its approved trusted internet connections.  This has allowed 
OPM to meet OMB requirements related to the trusted internet connections initiative.  Any 
improvements that need to be made to the agency’s current trusted internet connections controls 
are documented within the OPM’s Capability Validation Report. 
Metric 21 – Configuration Change Control Management 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has developed and documented 
policies and procedures for controlling configuration changes.  The policies address the 
necessary change control steps and required documentation needed to approve information 
system changes.  Our test work indicated that OPM has updated its configuration change control 
process to include project plans and additional reviews and approvals and is consistently 
adhering to its change control procedures. 
Metric 22 – Configuration Management Other Information 
We have no additional comments regarding configuration management. 
D. IDENTITY, CREDENTIAL, AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT 
The Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management (FICAM) program is a government-
wide effort to help Federal agencies increase security, compliance, interoperability, and customer 
service.  While OPM has room for maturity in this area, the agency has successfully 
28 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
implemented many Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM) related security 
controls.  The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in this domain.  OPM’s 
overall maturity level for the Identity, Credential, and Access Management domain is “3 – 
Consistently Implemented.” 
Metric 23 – ICAM Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
FY 2020 – Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has documented policies and procedures that 
define roles and responsibilities for stakeholders involved in the ICAM program. 
Since 2017, we have recommended that OPM conduct an analysis to identify limitations in the 
current ICAM program in order to ensure that stakeholders have adequate resources (people, 
processes, and technology) to implement the agency’s ICAM activities. 
OPM is working with a contractor to address the process and technology needs of the ICAM 
program.  OPM has not yet defined or assessed the staffing needs of its ICAM governance 
structure. 
The FICAM Roadmap and Implementation Guidance states, “As part of the [Logical Access 
Control Systems] modernization planning effort, agencies should evaluate their logical access 
policies and identify potential gaps where revisions, updates, and new policies and/or standards 
are needed to drive the process and underlying technology changes . . . .”  The guidance also 
states, “an agency should assess its organizational structure, identity stores/repositories, access 
control processes, and IT resources when planning new or modifying existing [Logical Access 
Control Systems] investments.” 
Failure to identify the necessary resources required to maintain and progress OPM’s ICAM 
program increases the risk of controls not being manageable or effective. 
Recommendation 28 (Rolled forward from FY 2017) 
We recommend that OPM conduct an analysis to identify limitations in the current ICAM 
program in order to ensure that stakeholders have adequate resources (people, processes, and 
technology) to implement the agency’s ICAM activities. 
Note: OPM has identified the processes and technology necessary to implement the agency’s 
ICAM activities but must assess the governance of their ICAM program with 
adequate/appropriate staff. 
29 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  In order to meet the intent of OMB Memorandum M-
19-17, OPM will work to establish a distinct ICAM program.” 
Metric 24 – ICAM Strategy 
FY 2020 – Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-Hoc.  Last year, we determined that OPM had not developed 
or implemented an ICAM strategy containing milestones for how the agency plans to align with 
Federal ICAM initiatives.  The ICAM strategy still has not been fully implemented, but OPM 
has contracted to assess the resource needs of the program.  OPM expects to implement its 
ICAM strategy by June 2021. 
According to the FICAM Roadmap and Implementation Guidance, “Agencies are to align their 
relevant segment and solution architectures to the common framework defined in the 
government-wide ICAM segment architecture.  Alignment activities include a review of current 
business practices, identification of gaps in the architecture, and development of a transition plan 
to fill the identified gaps.  The ICAM segment architecture has been adopted as an approved 
segment within the [Federal Enterprise Architecture], which agencies are required to 
implement.” 
The absence of an ICAM strategy that includes a review of current practices, identification of 
gaps, and a transition plan increases the risk that OPM will not successfully implement the 
Federal ICAM initiatives. 
Recommendation 29 (Rolled forward from FY 2017) 
We recommend that OPM develop and implement an ICAM strategy that considers a review of 
current practices (“as-is” assessment) and the identification of gaps (from a desired or “to-be” 
state), and contains milestones for how the agency plans to align with Federal ICAM initiatives. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  OPM will consider its actions to implement this 
recommendation once a distinct ICAM program is established.  This will include a gap 
analysis from the current state to the ‘as-is’ assessment.” 
30 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 25 – Implementation of ICAM Program 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined policies and procedures for many of the 
required elements of a comprehensive ICAM program (Metrics 26 – 31, below).  However, OPM 
has not implemented Personal Identity Verification (PIV) authentication at the application level 
for all systems (Metric 28, below), and does not adequately manage contractor accounts (Metric 
32, below). 
As explained above, OPM has not yet implemented an ICAM strategy.  In addition, OPM has not 
established an ICAM governance structure and thus cannot capture and share lessons learned on 
the effectiveness of the ICAM controls. 
The FICAM Roadmap and Implementation Guidance states that “Working groups are also used 
as a forum for sharing implementation lessons learned across bureaus/components or individual 
programs in order to reduce overall ICAM program risk and increase speed and efficiency in 
implementation.” 
Failure to consistently capture and share lessons learned on the efficacy of an ICAM program 
increases the risk of resources being used in an ineffective manner. 
Recommendation 30 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM implement a process to capture and share lessons learned on the 
effectiveness of its ICAM policies, procedures, and processes to update the program. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  OPM will consider its actions to implement this 
recommendation once a distinct ICAM program is established.  This will capture and share 
lessons learned.” 
Metric 26 – Personnel Risk 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has defined and implemented 
processes for assigning personnel risk designations and performing appropriate screenings prior 
to granting access to its systems.  Additionally, OPM re-screens individuals when they change 
positions or the risk designation of their current position is changed. 
31 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 27 – Access Agreements 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has defined and implemented 
centralized processes for developing, documenting and maintaining access agreements for all 
users of the network.  Users must sign the access agreements prior to gaining any network or 
systems access.  Access agreements are reviewed and re-signed as a part of IT Security and 
Privacy Awareness training on an annual basis thereafter. 
Metric 28 – Multi-factor Authentication with PIV 
Twenty-three of 
OPM’s major 
information systems 
still do not enforce 
strong authentication 
mechanisms. 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM 
has enforced multi-factor authentication for non-privileged 
network and remote access using PIV cards.  OPM continues 
to expand its PIV implementation incrementally, but almost 
half of OPM’s major information systems, 23 out of 47, still 
do not enforce strong authentication mechanisms.  
OMB Memorandum M-11-11 required all Federal information 
systems to use PIV credentials for multi-factor authentication by FY 2012.  Since that time, 
OMB Memorandum M-19-17 was issued, superseding the prior memorandum, but it continues to 
require that all new systems under development must be PIV compliant prior to being made 
operational. 
Failure to enforce PIV authentication for major information systems increases the risk of an 
attacker gaining unauthorized access to sensitive data. 
Recommendation 31 (Rolled forward from 2012) 
We recommend that the OCIO meet the requirements of OMB M-11-11 by upgrading its major 
information systems to require multi-factor authentication using PIV credentials. 
Note: OMB updated the guidance referenced in this recommendation with the issuance of OMB 
M-19-17.  As such, OPM should ensure its PIV compliance efforts align to the new guidance.  
We have not adjusted the language of the recommendation and continue to roll forward the 
recommendation as the new guidance still requires OPM to update its major information systems 
to require multi-factor authentication using PIV credentials. 
32 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  OPM currently utilizes PIV authentication to access 
the OPM network.  However, OPM will develop project plans for any of the OPM information 
systems that currently do not support multi-factor authentication in order to fully implement 
this requirement.  This effort will require the collaboration of and support across all 
components of OPM, and is resource and funding dependent.” 
Metric 29 – Strong Authentication Mechanisms for Privileged Users 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM utilizes tools including an 
enterprise password vault to enforce multi-factor authentication for privileged user access to the 
OPM network and its back-end servers.  Privileged users are also required to use multi-factor 
authentication to manage Domain Name System records. 
Metric 30 – Management of Privileged User Accounts 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has developed and implemented 
processes for provisioning, managing, and reviewing user accounts.  The OCIO restricts 
privileged user account functions and restricts session durations.  Additionally, the OCIO 
records, logs, and periodically reviews account sessions.  Tools have been implemented to 
automate some privileged account management processes including password rotation. 
Metric 31 – Remote Access Connections 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measurable.  OPM has implemented a variety of 
controls for remote access connections such as the use of approved cryptographic modules, 
system time outs, and session monitoring.  The agency ensures that remote access users’ 
activities are logged and periodically reviewed.  If anomalous activity is identified, OPM has the 
ability to rapidly disconnect remote sessions.  In addition, OPM verifies that user devices have 
been appropriately configured prior to allowing remote access, and restricts the ability of 
individuals to transfer remotely accessed data to non-authorized devices. 
Metric 32 – ICAM Other Information – Contractor Access Management 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  Not Applicable, no Longer a FISMA Metric.  OPM has defined and 
implemented processes for managing Federal employees’ physical and logical access to sensitive 
resources.  However, OPM does not centrally manage contractor access.  Furthermore, OPM 
does not maintain a complete list of all contractors who have access to OPM’s network, so there 
33 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
is no way for the OCIO to audit the termination process to ensure timely removal of contractor 
accounts. 
OPM is in the preliminary phases of deploying a tool that will maintain all current user records 
and enable user account auditing, to include contractor accounts.  However, the tool is being 
configured and is not completely operational. 
The Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual states that “Contractors that provide 
systems and services or other users with privileged access to agency/entity systems, applications, 
and data can introduce risks to their information and systems; for example, contractors often 
provide unsupervised remote maintenance and monitoring of agency/entity systems.”  It also 
states that “Terminated employees who continue to have access to critical or sensitive resources 
pose a major threat . . . .” 
Failure to maintain an accurate and up-to-date list of contractors with access to OPM systems 
increases the risk of inappropriate access to critical or sensitive resources. 
Recommendation 32 (Rolled forward from 2016) 
We recommend that the OCIO maintain a centralized list of all contractors that have access to 
the OPM network and use this list to routinely audit all user accounts for appropriateness. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO has incorporated all contractors into the 
centralized tool and master user record.  However processes have not yet been established for 
routine user account audit or review.  OPM relies on support from the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program to support 
the implementation of these requirements.  OPM continues to be at the forefront of working 
with DHS on the CDM program and will maintain this partnership as CDM evolves.  
Additionally, with new staff on board, we will evaluate our current posture and confirm 
remediation plans by the end of FY 2021 Q3.” 
E. DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY 
The Data Protection and Privacy metrics deal with the controls over the protection of personally 
identifiable information that is collected, used, maintained, shared, and disposed of by 
information systems.  The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in this 
domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Data Protection and Privacy domain is “1 – 
Ad-hoc.” 
34 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 33 – Data Protection and Privacy Policies and Procedures 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-Hoc.  The OPM Information Security and Privacy Policy 
Handbook continues to be the agency’s primary source for data protection and privacy policies.  
However, this handbook has not been updated since 2011 and does not contain the personally 
identifiable information (PII) protection plans, policies, and procedures necessary for a mature 
privacy program.  The Chief Privacy Officer position was established in 2016.  However, roles 
and responsibilities for the effective implementation of the agency’s privacy program have not 
been defined.  OPM’s privacy program is relatively new and has not had sufficient resources 
devoted to it. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, requires that an organization “Develops a strategic organizational 
privacy plan for implementing applicable privacy controls, policies, and procedures . . . .” 
Without a mature privacy program in place, OPM is at an increased risk of data loss and 
mishandling of sensitive information. 
Recommendation 33 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM define the roles and responsibilities necessary for the implementation 
of the agency’s privacy program. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with this recommendation.  As we noted in last year’s FISMA audit 
response, we disagree with the supposition that no roles and responsibilities for privacy are 
currently defined.  We have previously cited the establishment of the Office of Privacy and 
Information Management (OPIM) in FY 2019, and have provided the OIG with information 
regarding how roles and responsibilities have evolved.  As resources permit, we will continue 
to develop and reinforce these roles and responsibilities at the Agency.” 
OIG Comment: 
We acknowledge that OPM has created an office responsible for Privacy at OPM.  However, the 
privacy program continues to rely on roles defined in 2011.  The outdated privacy handbook still 
has the role of Chief Privacy Officer assigned to the CIO specifically.  However as noted above, 
OPM has created a separate position, Chief Privacy Officer, and office, OPIM, for managing 
privacy controls and implementing the privacy program.  As we noted in the FY19 FISMA Final 
35 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Report, OPM must define its agency-wide privacy program, not just a single position of 
responsibility.  As such, we continue to recommend that OPM define all of the roles and 
responsibilities necessary for the implementation of the agency’s privacy program. 
Recommendation 34 (rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM develop its privacy program by creating the necessary plans, policies, 
and procedures for the protection of PII. 
OPM Response: 
“We partially concur with the recommendation.  As noted in previous years, we assert that 
there are currently in place the necessary policies, plans and procedures to foster privacy 
compliance and protection of PII.  We have previously referenced various OMB memoranda, 
circulars, guides, documents, and templates in place as generally reliable documents for OPM 
employees to follow.  OPIM staff readily provides guidance to programs and CIO 
representatives in the course of developing privacy compliance documents.  We recognize that 
more work can be done to update written OPM policies, but severe resource constraints have 
led us to focus nearly all our efforts on action deliverables required by the e-government, 
FISMA and OMB Circulars/Memorandums.  With the recent approval to hire one additional 
staff person, we plan to renew our efforts to update documents during Fiscal Year 2021.” 
OIG Comment: 
While we agree that OPM has its privacy handbook from 2011, we noted in the FY 2019 FISMA 
Final Report that this document does not include the privacy controls detailed by NIST SP 800-
53, Revision 4, Appendix J published in 2013, or Circular A-130 published in 2016.  Without a 
detailed policy to follow, systems owners are open to interpret privacy controls as they see 
convenient.  The agency must implement effective plans, policies, and procedures to constitute a 
comprehensive privacy program as required by both NIST and OMB.  As such, we continue to 
recommend that OPM develop its privacy program by creating the necessary plans, policies, and 
procedures for the protection of PII. 
Metric 34 – Data Protection and Privacy Controls 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has implemented controls to 
protect sensitive information in its environment.  Examples include the use of encryption for 
systems containing PII and other agency sensitive data both at rest and in transit, controls to 
prevent and detect untrusted removable media, and controls related to the destruction or reuse of 
media containing PII or other sensitive agency data. 
36 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 35 – Data Exfiltration Prevention 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measurable.  OPM has defined policies to prevent 
data exfiltration from its IT environment and to implement enhanced network defenses.  OPM 
has implemented controls to monitor inbound and outbound network traffic, as well as ensure 
that all traffic passes through a web content filter.  In addition, the Agency has implemented a 
process to measure the effectiveness of the controls on an ongoing basis. 
Metric 36 – Data Breach Response Plan 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined and communicated its Data Breach 
Response Plan, including its processes and procedures for data breach notification.  As a part of 
the plan, a Breach Response Team has been established that includes the appropriate agency 
officials.  OPM’s breach response plan requires periodic testing and updating.  However, this 
year OPM has not updated or tested its Data Breach Response Plan. 
NIST SP 800-122, states that “The policies and procedures should be communicated to the 
organization’s entire staff through training and awareness programs.  Training may include 
tabletop exercises to simulate an incident and test whether the response plan is effective and 
whether the staff members understand and are able to perform their roles effectively.” 
Failure to test the Data Breach Response Plan routinely increases the agency’s risk of major data 
loss in the event of a security incident.  Testing the plan increases the likelihood that a breach 
response will be efficient and effective at limiting the affects from a security incident. 
Recommendation 35 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM develop a process to routinely test the Data Breach Response Plan. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with this recommendation.  As we noted last year, we agree that an annual 
exercise to review the Breach Response Plan can help ascertain and perfect roles and 
responsibilities in the event of a breach and help to improve the risk analysis and appropriate 
mitigation steps spelled out in OMB Memorandum 17-12 and our own Breach Response Plan.  
We have not had the resources to be able to sufficiently plan and implement the exercise.  
While the Breach Response Plan from 2017 remains viable, we also intend to review and 
update it during the next fiscal year.  We also need to emphasize that OPIM staff regularly 
reviews reports from the Remedy system that identifies potential breaches, and advises the 
37 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Chief Privacy Officer as necessary.  We follow up with OPM programs as necessary to clarify 
situations and recommend actions to mitigate any risks identified.” 
Metric 37 – Privacy Awareness Training 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  1 – Ad-Hoc.  OPM administers general privacy-awareness training for 
all employees as a part of their annual IT security training.  OPM policy requires users to 
“Complete role-based security or privacy training if assigned a significant security or privacy 
role” and system owners to “Provide role-based security and privacy training to OPM 
information system users responsible for the operation of security functions/mechanisms for 
systems under his or her portfolio.”  However, OPM has not developed role-based privacy 
training for individuals. 
OMB Memorandum 17-12 states, “Agencies should not limit training on how to identify, report, 
and respond to a suspected or confirmed breach to annual security and privacy training.  Rather, 
agencies should consider annual security and privacy training as the baseline and consider 
specialized training for specific groups, such as supervisors and employees who have access to 
or responsibility for High Value Assets.” 
OMB Circular A-130 requires agencies to “Provide foundational as well as more advanced levels 
of security and privacy training to information system users (including managers, senior 
executives, and contractors) and ensure that measures are in place to test the knowledge level of 
information system users;” and to “Provide role-based security and privacy training to employees 
and contractors with assigned security and privacy roles and responsibilities, including 
managers, before authorizing access to Federal information or information systems or 
performing assigned duties. . . .” 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, Privacy control AR-5 requires an organization: “Administers basic 
privacy training [Assignment: organization-defined frequency, at least annually] and targeted, 
role-based privacy training for personnel having responsibility for personally identifiable 
information (PII) or for activities that involve PII [Assignment: organization-defined frequency, 
at least annually] . . . .” 
NIST SP 800-122 states that “To reduce the possibility that PII will be accessed, used, or 
disclosed inappropriately, all individuals that have been granted access to PII should receive 
appropriate training and, where applicable, specific role-based training.” 
Failure to provide specific training to individuals with assigned security and privacy roles and 
responsibilities increases the Agency’s risk of improperly implemented controls, which can lead 
to mishandled data resulting in a data loss incident. 
38 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 36 (Rolled forward from 2018) 
We recommend that OPM identify individuals with heightened responsibility for PII and provide 
role-based training to these individuals at least annually. 
OPM Response: 
“We partially concur with the recommendation.  Although we assert that for many of OPM’s 
employees the traditional IT Security and Privacy Awareness Training is sufficient, we 
support the importance of role-based training for certain specialized employees.  In fact, we 
call this out in our privacy compliance guidance.  We query program and CIO representatives 
in our adjudication of the Privacy Threshold Analysis as to whether role-based training is 
required for particular program positions and what has been done to accomplish this.  Our 
assessment is that program and support organizations largely understand that role-based 
training may be needed for various positions and act on it.  At our current resource level, we 
simply do not have the bandwidth to take on any additional responsibilities.” 
OIG Comment: 
We acknowledge that the annual training may be sufficient for some of OPM’s employees.  
However, OPM needs to identify those individuals and roles with heightened responsibilities, 
which could indicate that additional training is required to implement the required privacy 
controls and processes at OPM.  While we understand that resources are limited, we hope that 
OPIM can continue to work with the Director to acquire the resources necessary to implement 
key privacy controls. 
Metric 38 – Data Protection and Privacy Other Information 
We had no additional information about OPM's data protection controls or privacy program. 
F. SECURITY TRAINING 
FISMA requires that all Government employees and contractors take annual IT security 
awareness training.  In addition, employees with IT security responsibility are required to take 
specialized training specific to their job function.  OPM has a strong history of providing its 
employees with IT security awareness training for the ever-changing risk environment and has 
made progress in providing tailored training to those with significant security responsibilities.  
The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in this domain.  OPM’s overall 
maturity level for the Security Training domain is “4 – Managed and Measurable.” 
39 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 39 – Security Training Policies and Procedures 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM has established an agency-wide 
IT security awareness training program.  Roles and responsibilities for stakeholders are defined 
and communicated across the agency.  OPM continues to mature its security training program by 
consistently collecting and analyzing performance measures of the training activities. 
Metric 40 – Assessment of Workforce 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has conducted a gap analysis to determine the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities of its workforce to determine employees’ specialized training 
needs.  OPM has continued to refine its process to implement any training-related strategies 
agency-wide.  OPM will participate in a Federal-wide discussion of skills gaps working with 
various human resource groups across the government to refine the agency’s specialized training 
strategy.  OPM’s efforts to tailor the specialized training strategy will allow the agency to update 
its gap analysis periodically to account for a changing risk environment. 
Metric 41 – Security Awareness Strategy 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  In FY 2020, the security awareness and training strategy 
has been fully developed to maintain a security awareness program tailored to the mission and 
risk environment.  However, OPM has not consistently implemented its agency-wide security 
awareness and training strategy as there has been only one gap analysis performed since 2018.  
As stated in metric 40, a periodic re-assessment should to be performed. 
Metric 42 – Specialized Security Training Policies 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 –Managed and Measurable.  OPM has established policies and 
procedures that require agency employees to take security awareness and specialized security 
training.  OPM has also implemented a process of tracking metrics related to security awareness 
and training activities. 
40 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 43 – Tracking IT Security Training 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  The OCIO provides annual IT 
security and privacy awareness training to all OPM users through an interactive web-based 
course.  The course introduces employees and contractors to the basic concepts of IT security 
and privacy, including topics such as the importance of information security, security threats and 
vulnerabilities, privacy training, telework, mobile devices, Wi-Fi guidance, and the roles and 
responsibilities of users.  In addition, OPM conducts random phishing exercises and tracks the 
results in order to measure the effectiveness of the exercises.  OPM also conducts associated 
follow-ups and these are used to update the IT security training program.  All of OPM’s 
employees and contractors completed the security awareness training course in FY 2020. 
Metric 44 – Tracking Specialized IT Security Training 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measurable.  OPM employees with significant 
information security responsibilities are required to take specialized security training in addition 
to the annual awareness training.  The OCIO uses a database to track the security training taken 
by employees identified as having security responsibility.  One example of the specialized 
training program involves the OCIO conducting targeted phishing exercises/emails for 
individuals with security responsibilities, tracking the exercise results, and following up as 
needed. 
Metric 45 – Security Training Other Information 
We have no additional comments regarding the security training program. 
G. INFORMATION SECURITY CONTINUOUS MONITORING 
Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) controls involve the ongoing assessment of 
control effectiveness in support of the agency’s efforts to manage information security 
vulnerabilities and threats.  The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in this 
domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Information Security Continuous Monitoring 
domain is “2 – Defined.” 
Metric 46 – ISCM Strategy 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has developed an ISCM Strategy that addresses the 
monitoring of security controls at the organization, business unit, and individual information 
system levels.  At the organization and business unit levels, the ISCM Strategy defines how the 
agency’s activities support risk management in accordance with agency risk tolerance.  At the 
41 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
information system level, the ISCM Strategy establishes processes for monitoring security 
controls for effectiveness and reporting any findings. 
However, in practice, OPM is not consistently implementing several of the objectives outlined in 
its ISCM Strategy, to include: 
•
“Security controls must be assessed to ensure continued effectiveness of their  
implementation and operation.”;
•
“Identified threats and vulnerabilities must be reported timely to support risk management  
decisions.” ; and
•
“Feedback must be collected frequently and incorporated into a system of continually  
improving processes.”
As we detail in Metric 49, only 19 of OPM’s 47 systems were subject to adequate security 
controls testing and monitoring in FY 2020. 
At this stage in the development of its ISCM program, OPM has not consistently implemented 
the ISCM strategy and is not meeting its goal of providing stakeholders with sufficient 
information to evaluate risk. 
Metric 47 – ISCM Policies and Procedures 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has developed ISCM policies and procedures 
tailored to OPM’s environment including specific requirements and deliverables.  However, as 
discussed in more detail under Metric 49, OPM has not consistently implemented its ISCM 
policies. 
Metric 48 – ISCM Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined the structure, roles, and responsibilities 
of its ISCM teams and stakeholders.  Last year, OPM conducted an analysis that identified and 
quantified resource gaps in the ISCM program.  This year, OPM has made progress to fill those 
gaps.  However, as discussed in more detail under Metric 49, OPM has not ensured that 
individuals are consistently performing all of the defined roles and responsibilities. 
42 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 49 – Ongoing Security Assessments 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined its processes for performing ongoing 
security control assessments, granting system authorizations, and monitoring security controls 
for individual systems.  However, OPM’s Security Assessment and Authorization 
(Authorization) process and testing of security controls are still areas of concern. 
1) System Authorizations
System owners are responsible for preparing an Authorization package for review and 
acceptance by the Authorizing Official.  However, OPM policy does not currently address 
what actions should be taken regarding an information system’s Authorization status when an 
agency official in the Authorization process changes roles or is no longer with the agency. 
We reviewed Authorizations for OPM’s 47 systems and found that two were signed by 
agency officials no longer with OPM and three had expired. 
NIST SP 800-37, Revision 1, requires that “In the event that there is a change in authorizing 
officials, the new authorizing official reviews the current Authorization decisions document, 
Authorization package, and any updated documents created as a result of the ongoing 
monitoring activities.  If the new authorizing official is willing to accept the currently 
documented risk, then the official signs a new Authorization decision . . . formally 
[accepting] responsibility and accountability . . . and explicitly accepting the risk . . . .” 
Failure to update a system’s documentation and Authorization when an official in the 
Authorization process leaves increases the risk that the system will operate without proper 
risk management oversight and accountability. 
Recommendation 37 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that all active systems in OPM’s inventory have a complete and current 
Authorization. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The OIG found that two of OPM’s authorizations 
were signed by an agency official no longer with OPM.  We understand and agree with the 
need to have a new Authorizing Official re-evaluate authorizations in such circumstances.  
OPM updated its processes using NIST guidance in this area, specifically updating our 
43 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Information System Continuous Monitoring strategy.  Further details are outlined in the 
technical comments.” 
OIG Comment: 
OPM’s technical response to the draft report included an updated version of its ISCM 
procedures.  The updated procedures contain appropriate guidance for the agency when the 
Authorizing Official of an information systems changes roles or is no longer with OPM.  We 
recommend that OPM provide IOC with evidence that it is in compliance with the updated 
procedures.  
Recommendation 38 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the performance standards of all OPM system owners be modified to 
include a requirement related to FISMA compliance for the information systems they own.  
At a minimum, system owners should be required to ensure that their systems have valid 
Authorizations. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with the recommendation.  We continue to take OIG’s 
recommendation under advisement and agree that system owners provide critical support 
regarding the security, through the [Authorization] process, for their respective systems.  
In reviewing the specific recommendation by the OIG, however, and after further analysis 
was completed, OPM has determined it will take other measures to ensure its system 
owners focus on the security of their systems.  Currently, OCIO has implemented checks 
and balances to provide system owners with the necessary information in advance of 
[Authorization]s expiring; and additional analysis is underway to determine if specific 
training for our system owners is required.  Once the analysis is completed OPM will 
create a plan, including identification of resources – if needed.” 
OIG Comment: 
We continue to see problems year after year in OPM’s Authorization process.  It continues to 
be our opinion that modifying system owners’ performance standards to include metrics for 
FISMA compliance for the information systems they own would improve the quality and 
consistency of system Authorization packages.  However, if OPM believes that the “other 
measures” referenced above will achieve the same intent as our recommendation, then it 
should provide sufficient evidence to IOC.  
44 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
2) Controls Testing
OPM policy requires reporting the security status of information systems to the Chief 
Information Officer for the organization and Authorizing Official for the systems at least 
quarterly.  We reviewed evidence of security control testing for the first two quarters of FY 
2020 for OPM’s 47 major information systems.  Of those, only 19 systems were subject to 
security controls testing that complied with OPM’s requirements for both quarters. 
FISMA requires agencies to “conduct assessments of 
security controls at a frequency appropriate to risk, but no 
less than annually.” 
By failing to complete a comprehensive security controls 
test for all information systems, OPM cannot move 
forward in implementing its ISCM strategy.  Furthermore, 
OPM is at risk of an attack that exploits vulnerabilities that 
could have been identified by appropriate security controls 
testing. 
Recommendation 39 (Rolled forward from 2008) 
We recommend that OPM ensure that an annual test of security controls has been completed 
for all systems. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO completed an ISSO funding 
requirement gap analysis which was a critical component of OCIO efforts to obtain the 
appropriate funding.  OCIO continues to take steps to hire the adequate number of ISSOs 
through the ISSO funding model.” 
Metric 50 – Measuring ISCM Program Effectiveness 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has identified and defined performance measures 
and requirements to assess the ISCM program effectiveness, achieve situational awareness, and 
control ongoing risk.  However, OPM is not performing the controls assessments in the ISCM 
strategy consistently enough to provide meaningful data for measuring the effectiveness of the 
ISCM program. 
Only 19 of OPM’s 
major information 
systems were subject 
to security controls 
compliant with OPM’s 
policy. 
45 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
NIST SP 800-137 states that an organization must “Analyze the data collected and Report 
findings, determining the appropriate response.”  Furthermore, “Organizations [must] develop 
procedures for collecting and reporting assessment and monitoring results, including results that 
are derived via manual methods, and for managing and collecting information from POA&Ms to 
be used for frequency determination, status reporting, and monitoring strategy revision.” 
Failure to consistently capture the performance measures can impede OPM’s ability to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the ISCM program. 
Recommendation 40 (Rolled forward from 2017) 
We recommend that OPM evaluate qualitative and quantitative performance measures on the 
performance of its ISCM program once it can consistently acquire security assessment results, as 
referenced in recommendation 39. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with this finding.  OPM provided performance measures during the course 
of the audit period and has used those measures to maintain situational awareness and make 
meaningful improvements to the program.  Thus, we do not agree that this measure can only 
be in place after Recommendation 39 is implemented.  In fact, OPM measures several areas of 
its program, not just ongoing control assessments; Recommendation 39 covers just one of the 
areas of the ISCM program.  OPM also uses the data regarding the completion of its tests, as 
measured under Recommendation 39, as one of its metrics.  The lack of consistency for 
completing assessments as described under Recommendation 39 does not preclude OPM from 
collecting performance measures or making improvements to the program's effectiveness.” 
OIG Comment: 
Ongoing control assessment has been identified as a problem at OPM for more than a decade.  
We acknowledge that OPM’s ISCM program and ISCM metrics are more than just the ongoing 
controls assessment.  However, the majority of other areas in the ISCM metrics already have 
recommendations to help OPM improve its security posture, including:  hardware and software 
asset management, configuration and vulnerability management, contingency planning and 
contingency plan testing, and POA&Ms and Authorizations.  In this recommendation, we are 
focusing on the ongoing controls testing.  OPM’s ISCM strategy identifies controls testing as one 
of its objectives stating, “Security controls must be assessed to ensure continued effectiveness of 
their implementation and operation.” and that “Metrics must be defined that provide meaningful 
indications of the security state of information systems and a path for measurable performance 
improvements.”  However, we acknowledge that this recommendation could be implemented 
46 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
prior to Recommendation 39.  If OPM is consistently evaluating the ISCM metrics for ongoing 
control assessments, then as part of the audit resolution process we recommend that OPM 
provide IOC with evidence that the agency implemented this recommendation. 
Metric 51 – ISCM Other Information 
We have no additional comments regarding OPM’s ISCM program. 
H. INCIDENT RESPONSE 
Incident response is an organized approach for reacting to a cyber-attack in an effective manner 
and limiting the damage, repair costs, and down time of critical information systems.  OPM has 
consistently implemented an effective incident response program, and we have no audit 
recommendations in this area.  The sections below detail the results for each individual metric in 
this domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Incident Response domain is “4 – 
Managed and Measurable.” 
Metric 52 – Incident Response Policies, Procedures, Plans, Strategies 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM’s incident response policies, 
procedures, plans, and strategies have been defined, communicated, and consistently 
implemented.  OPM monitors and analyzes qualitative and quantitative performance measures on 
the effectiveness of its incident response program and is consistently capturing and sharing 
lessons learned to implement updates to the program as appropriate. 
Metric 53 – Incident Roles and Responsibilities 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM has defined roles and 
responsibilities related to incident response, and its incident response teams have adequate 
resources (people, processes, and technology) to manage and measure the effectiveness of 
incident response activities. 
Metric 54 – Incident Detection and Analysis 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  3 – Consistently Implemented.  OPM utilizes a classification system for 
its incident response program, allowing the agency to quickly analyze and prioritize any reported 
or detected incidents.  In addition, OPM has implemented several security tools to analyze 
activity patterns to identify precursors and indicators of security threats to prevent security 
incidents.  OPM is in the process of developing profiling techniques on its networks and systems 
so that it can more effectively detect security incidents. 
47 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 55 – Incident Handling 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM has defined its processes for 
incident handling in an incident response manual.  The processes include containment strategies 
for various types of major incidents, eradication activities to eliminate components of an incident 
and mitigation techniques for exploited vulnerabilities.  OPM uses metrics to measure the impact 
of successful incidents and is quickly able to mitigate related vulnerabilities on other systems so 
that they are not subject to the same exploitation. 
Metric 56 – Sharing Incident Response Information 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM has a documented policy that 
defines how incident response information will be shared with individuals that have significant 
security responsibility.  There are controls in place to ensure that security incidents are reported 
to DHS, law enforcement, the OPM OIG, and Congress in a timely manner.  OPM has developed 
and implemented incident response metrics to measure and manage the timely reporting of 
incident information to organizational officials and external stakeholders. 
Metric 57 – Contractual Relationships in Support of Incident Response 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM collaborates with DHS and 
other parties, when needed, for technical assistance, surge resources, and any special 
requirements for quickly responding to incidents.  OPM uses third party contractors, when 
needed, to support incident response processes.  OPM also utilizes software tools provided by 
DHS for intrusion detection and prevention capabilities. 
Metric 58 – Technology to Support Incident Response 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  4 – Managed and Measureable.  OPM has implemented incident 
response tools to collect and retain data consistent with the agency’s incident response policy, 
plans, and procedures.  OPM utilizes the incident response tools for monitoring and analyzing 
qualitative and quantitative incident response performance across the agency.  OPM uses the data 
collected from these tools to generate monthly reports for stakeholders on the effectiveness of its 
incident response program. 
48 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 59 – Incident Response Other Information 
We have no additional comments regarding OPM’s incident response capability. 
I. CONTINGENCY PLANNING 
Contingency planning includes the policies and procedures that ensure adequate availability of 
information systems, data, and business processes.  The sections below detail the results for each 
individual metric in this domain.  OPM’s overall maturity level for the Contingency Planning 
domain is “2 – Defined.” 
Metric 60 – Contingency Planning Roles and Responsibilities 
FY 2020 – Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has a policy describing the agency’s contingency 
planning program roles and responsibilities as well as system-level contingency planning 
documents that assign individuals to specific recovery activities.  We determined that 44 of the 
47 systems observed had designated contingency plan response teams to recover systems in the 
event of a service-impacting incident. 
In FY 2019, OPM indicated that staffing constraints led to lapses in contingency plan 
maintenance and testing.  This year we continue to see these constraints affect compliance with 
OPM policy as only a third of contingency plans were updated as required (see Metric 63 below 
for additional information) and less than a quarter were tested as required (see Metric 64 below 
for additional information). 
NIST SP 800-34, Revision 1, states that “Recovery personnel should be assigned to . . . teams 
that will respond to the event, recover capabilities, and return the system to normal operations.” 
Failure to staff critical roles in the contingency planning process increases the risk that OPM will 
be unable to restore systems to an operational status in the event of a disaster. 
Recommendation 41 (Rolled forward from FY 2018) 
We recommend that OPM perform a gap-analysis to determine the contingency planning 
requirements (people, processes, and technology) necessary to implement the agency’s 
contingency planning policy effectively. 
49 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  We are aware that there are significant technology 
and resource gaps related to contingency plan testing.  We will aim to complete a gap analysis 
to document the requirements.” 
Metric 61 – Contingency Planning Policies and Procedures 
FY 2020 – Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has contingency planning policies and procedures 
in place, but does not consistently adhere to them.  Contingency plans, as well as the contingency 
planning policy and procedures, are not being reviewed and updated in compliance with OPM 
policy.  In addition, lapses in contingency plan testing have prevented consistent implementation 
of OPM’s lessons learned process, which should serve as the basis for documentation updates 
and process improvement. 
System owners have the responsibility to ensure systems are subject to a contingency plan test 
each year and that plans are updated accordingly.  Failure to manage contingency plans 
appropriately in a changing environment increases the risk that contingency plans will not help 
OPM meet system recovery time and business objectives should disruptive events occur. 
The sections below contain specific recommendations related to contingency plan management; 
some of these recommendations have been longstanding issues at OPM. 
Metric 62 – Business Impact Analysis 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  Identifying an organization’s essential mission and the 
risks facing its business functions is a critical element in developing contingency plans.  OPM 
currently has a process in place to develop a Business Impact Analysis (BIA) at the information 
system level.  Of OPM’s 47 major information systems, 35 were determined to have up-to-date 
BIAs. 
In addition, OPM successfully performed an agency-wide BIA in March 2020 as a part of the 
National Continuity Program.  However, OPM has not incorporated the results of this BIA into 
the system-level contingency plans.  It is the responsibility of the system owners and Authorizing 
Officials to ensure that BIA results are communicated and reflected in system-level contingency 
plans. 
NIST SP 800-53, Revision 4, advises that the agency develop a contingency plan for information 
systems that “Identifies essential missions and business functions and associated contingency 
requirements . . . .” 
50 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Federal Continuity Directive 1 requires agencies to complete “a Business Impact Analysis . . . for 
all threats and hazards, and all capabilities associated with the continuance of essential functions 
at least every two years.” 
Outdated or inaccurate BIAs increase the risk that the agency would be unable to prioritize 
recovery operations effectively in the event of a service-impacting incident. 
Recommendation 42 (Rolled forward from FY 2017) 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct an agency-wide BIA and incorporate the results into the 
system-level contingency plans. 
Note: While OPM has performed an agency wide BIA, this recommendation remains open, as 
OPM has not incorporated the results into the system-level contingency plans. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The agency is working towards the requirement to see 
the agency wide BIA results reflected in all contingency plans.” 
Metric 63 – Contingency Plan Maintenance 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has a policy that requires a contingency plan to be 
in place and annually updated for every major information system.  It is the responsibility of the 
OCIO to coordinate with the system owners and authorizing officials to ensure the contingency 
plans are in place and that an update occurs in accordance with policy. 
While OPM has made progress, it is still not compliant with this policy.  Only 16 of the 47 major 
systems have contingency plans that were reviewed and updated in FY 2020. 
NIST SP 800-34, Revision 1, states that “[I]t is essential that the [information system 
contingency plan] be reviewed and updated regularly as part of the organization’s change 
management process to ensure that new information is documented and contingency measures 
are revised if required.” 
Outdated or inaccurate contingency plans increase the risk that the agency will be unable to 
restore operations effectively and efficiently in the event of a service-impacting incident. 
51 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 43 (Rolled forward from 2014) 
We recommend that the OCIO ensure that all of OPM’s major systems have contingency plans 
in place and that they are reviewed and updated annually. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO will conduct a gap analysis and coordinate 
with each system’s Program Management Office including the system owners and authorizing 
officials to help ensure contingency plans are in place and that the annual review and update 
of the plans occurs in accordance with policy.  The required funding and resources must be 
provided before we are able to effectively implement this remediation.” 
Metric 64 – Contingency Plan Testing 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  Routinely testing contingency plans is a critical step in 
ensuring plans can be executed successfully in the event of a disaster.  It is the OCIO’s 
responsibility to coordinate with each system owner and authorizing official to test contingency 
plans annually in accordance with policy.  During our testing only 11 of the 47 systems observed 
were subject to a contingency plan test in compliance with OPM policy. 
OPM policy requires system owners to “Test the contingency 
plan for the information system [at least annually] . . . .” 
Failure to perform contingency plan testing for every major 
information system increases the risk that the agency will be 
unable to restore operations effectively and efficiently in the 
event of a service-impacting incident. 
Recommendation 44 (Rolled forward from 2008) 
We recommend that OPM test the contingency plans for each system on an annual basis. 
OPM Response: 
“We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO will conduct a gap analysis and coordinate 
with each system’s Program Management Office … including the system owners and 
authorizing officials to help ensure contingency plans are in place and that the annual review 
and update of the plans occurs in accordance with policy.  The required funding and 
resources must be secured before we are able to effectively implement this remediation.” 
Only 11 of OPM’s 
major information 
systems were subject 
to a contingency plan 
test in accordance with 
OPM policy. 
52 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Metric 65 – Information System Backup and Storage 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 - Defined.  OPM policy defines controls for data backup, recovery 
and, testing.  System-level contingency plan templates include sections for data backup 
procedures, alternate processing procedures, and alternate storage site information. 
However, we have not received evidence to indicate that OPM performs controls testing to 
ensure that the alternate storage and processing sites provide information security safeguards 
equivalent to that of the primary site.  We reviewed 17 system security plans and observed that 
OPM did not consistently document the review of the alternate storage/processing site 
safeguards. 
NIST 800-53, Revision 4, states the organization “Ensures that the alternate storage site provides 
information security safeguards equivalent to that of the primary site.”  NIST 800-53, Revision 
4, also states the organization “Ensures that the alternate processing site provides information 
security safeguards equivalent to those of the primary site.” 
Without testing and assurance of equivalent information security safeguards at alternate storage 
and processing sites, there is an increased risk that data will be compromised or lost during 
system recovery activities. 
Recommendation 45 
We recommend that OPM perform and document controls testing to ensure security safeguards 
for alternate processing and storage sites are equivalent to the primary sites. 
OPM Response: 
“We do not concur with the recommendation.  Security controls are tested as a part of the 
initial security authorization and on an ongoing basis as defined within the OPM ISCM Plan.  
We recognize that some of the systems referenced by the OIG have test results that were not 
considered during the audit and others inherit controls from other systems, including [Federal 
Risk and Authorization Management Program] cloud service providers.  The OCIO is 
available for continued discussion regarding these control tests, the test results, and additional 
documentation with the OIG upon request.” 
53 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OIG Comment: 
We acknowledge that OPM policy does require that security controls be tested as a part of an 
initial Authorization.  Our testing focused on existing external systems under OPM’s continuous 
monitoring process to ensure that controls continue to be in place and effective after an initial 
authorization.  OPM’s ISCM Strategy states, “Due to the restrictions on OPM’s capabilities to 
timely monitor and report on the status of the security posture of externally hosted information 
systems … a zero-base review must be conducted on externally hosted information systems at 
least every three years.”  It also defines a zero-base review stating, “The zero-base review 
includes an assessment of all implemented security controls from the information SSP.”  For 
conducting control assessments OPM’ Authorization guidance states, “Each control that is 
inherited from the [cybersecurity common controls] or another system will validate the accuracy 
of inheritance.”  During the course of the audit, we were unable to verify that security controls at 
alternate sites were adequately tested.  At a minimum, the controls testing documentation should 
validate the control inheritance.  As such, we continue to recommend that OPM perform and 
document controls testing to ensure security safeguards for alternate processing and storage sites 
are equivalent to the primary sites.  If OPM believes that it is consistently evaluating security 
controls at its systems’ alternate sites, then as part of the audit resolution process, we recommend 
that OPM provide IOC with evidence that the agency implemented this recommendation. 
Metric 66 – Communication of Recovery Activities 
FY 2020 Maturity Level:  2 – Defined.  OPM has defined the process for communicating results 
of recovery activities to stakeholders in policies and procedures.  At the conclusion of a 
contingency plan test or significant service-impacting incident, results are to be communicated to 
stakeholders in the form of an after action report.  However, OPM is not adhering to this policy, 
as contingency plans are not tested annually for all systems.  We received valid contingency plan 
tests for only 11 of the 47 systems observed. 
OPM was able to produce some completed after action reports that had been shared, but without 
the required testing, there is not sufficient evidence to prove that the control is consistently 
implemented. 
Metric 67 – Contingency Planning Other Information 
We have no additional comments regarding contingency planning. 
54 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
APPENDIX I – Detailed FISMA Results by Metric 
Function 
U.S. OPM 
Metric Maturity 
Domain Maturity 
Metric Number and Description  
Maturity 
Overall 
Level 
Level 
Level 
Maturity Level 
1 - Inventory of Major Systems and System Interconnections  
1 
2 - Hardware Inventory 
1 
3 - Software Inventory 
1 
4 - System Security Categorization 
3 
5 - Risk Policy and Strategy 
1 
Risk Management 
Identify 
6 - Information Security Architecture 
1 
and Contractor 
7- Risk Management Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
3 
Systems 
Level 1: Ad 
8 - Plan of Action and Milestones 
2 
Hoc 
9 - System Level Risk Assessments 
2 
Level 1: Ad Hoc 
10 - Risk Communication 
3 
11 - Contractor Clauses 
3 
12 - Centralized Enterprise-wide Risk Tool 
1 
13 - Risk Management Other Information - SDLC 
n/a 
14 - Configuration Mgt. Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
2 
15 - Configuration Management Plan 
2 
16 - Implementation of Policies and Procedures 
2 
Configuration 
17 - Baseline Configurations 
1 
Management 
18 - Security Configuration Settings 
1 
19 - Flaw Remediation and Patch Management 
2 
Level 2: Defined 
20 - Trusted Internet Connection Program 
3 
21 - Configuration Change Control Management 
3 
22 - Configuration Management Other Information  
n/a 
23 - ICAM Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
2 
24 - ICAM Strategy  
1 
25 - Implementation of ICAM Program 
2 
Identify and Access 
26 - Personnel Risk 
3 
Management 
27 - Access Agreements 
3 
28 - Multi-factor Authentication with PIV 
3 
Level 3: 
Protect 
29 - Strong Authentication Mechanisms for Privileged Users 
3 
Consistently 
Implemented 
Level 3: 
30 - Management of Privileged User Accounts 
3 
Consistently 
31 - Remote Access Connections 
4 
Implemented 
32 - ICAM Other Information - Contractor Access Management 
n/a 
Agency Overall 
33 - Data Protection and Privacy Policies and Procedures 
1 
Cybersecurity 
34 - Data Protection and Privacy Controls 
3 
Data Protection and 
Program 
35 - Data Exfiltration Protection 
4 
Privacy 
36 - Data Breach Response Plan 
2 
Level 2: Defined 
37 - Privacy Awareness Training 
1 
Level 1: Ad Hoc 
38 - Other Information - Data Protection and Privacy  
n/a 
39 - Security Training Policies and Procedures 
3 
40 - Assessment of Workforce 
2 
Security Training 
41 - Security Awareness Strategy 
2 
42 - Specialized Security Training Policies 
4 
Level 4: 
43 - Tracking IT Security Training 
4 
Managed and 
44 - Tracking Specialized IT Security Training 
4 
Measurable 
45 - Other Information - Security Training Program 
n/a 
46 - ISCM Strategy 
2 
47 - ISCM Policies and Procedures 
2 
Continuous 
Detect 
48 - ISCM Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources 
2 
Monitoring 
49 - Ongoing Security Assessments 
2 
Level 2: 
50 - Measuring ISCM Program Effectiveness 
2 
Level 2: Defined 
Defined 
51 - ISCM Other Information  
n/a 
52 - Incident Response Policies, Procedures, Plans, and Strategies 
4 
53 - Incident Roles and Responsibilities  
4 
Respond  
54 - Incident Detection and Analysis 
3 
Incident Response 
55 - Incident Handling  
4 
Level 4: 
56 - Sharing Incident Response Information  
4 
Level 4: Managed 
Managed and 
57 - Contractual Relationships in Support of Incident Response 
4 
and Measurable 
Measurable 
58 - Technology to Support Incident Response 
4 
59 - Incident Response Other Information 
n/a 
60 - Contingency Planning Roles and Responsibilities  
2 
61 - Contingency Planning Policies and Procedures 
2 
62 - Business Impact Analysis 
2 
Contingency 
Recover 
63 - Contingency Plan Maintenance 
2 
Planning 
64 - Contingency Plan Testing  
2 
Level 2: 
65 - Information System Backup and Storage 
2 
Level 2: Defined 
Defined 
66 - Communication of Recovery Activities 
2 
67 - Contingency Planning Other Information  
n/a 
KEY 
Red – Ad Hoc 
Yellow – Defined 
Green – Consistently 
Implemented or 
higher 
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Red – Ad Hoc  
Yellow – Defined 
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Yellow – Defined   
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
Green – Consistently Implemented or higher  
55 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
APPENDIX II – Status of Prior OIG Audit Recommendations 
The table below outlines the current status of recommendations issued in the FY 2019 FISMA audit (Report No. 4A-CI-00-19-029, 
issued October 29, 2019). 
1 
We recommend that OPM improve the policies and procedures for 
defining system boundaries and classifying the systems in its 
environment. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 1 
2 
We recommend that the OCIO ensure that all interconnection 
security agreements are valid and properly maintained. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 2 
3 
We recommend that the OCIO ensure that a valid memorandum of 
understanding/agreement exists for every interconnection. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 3 
4 
We recommend that OPM define the 
hardware inventory. 
procedures for maintaining its 
New recommendation 
FY 2019 
in 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 4 
5 
We recommend that OPM improve its system inventory by 
correlating the elements of the inventory to the servers and 
information systems they reside on. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 5 
6 
We recommend that OPM define policies and procedures for a 
centralized software inventory. 
Note: While OPM has defined a policy requiring a centralized 
software inventory, this recommendation remains open, as the 
agency has not developed the procedures. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 6 
We recommend that OPM define the standard data elements for an 
7 
inventory of software assets and licenses with the detailed 
information necessary for tracking and reporting, and that it update 
its software inventory to include these standard data elements. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 7 
8 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to ensure that 
only supported software and operating platforms are used within the 
network environment. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 8 
9 
We recommend that OPM develop an action plan and outline its 
processes to address the supply chain risk management requirements 
of NIST SP 800-161. 
New recommendation 
FY 2019 
in 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 9 
10 
We recommend that OPM update its enterprise architecture, to 
include the information security architecture elements required by 
NIST and OMB guidance. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 10 
11 
We recommend that the OPM Director ensure that the OCIO has 
sufficient resources to adequately operate, secure, and modernize 
agency IT systems. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 11 
56 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
We also recommend that the agency hire a sufficient number of 
ISSOs to adequately support all of the agency’s major information 
systems. 
12 
We recommend that OPM adhere to remediation dates for its 
POA&M weaknesses. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 12 
13 
We recommend that OPM update the remediation deadline in its 
POA&Ms when the control weakness has not been addressed by the 
originally scheduled deadline (i.e., the POA&M deadline should not 
reflect a date in the past and the original due date should be 
maintained to track the schedule variance). 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 13 
14 
We recommend that OPM complete risk assessments for each major 
information system that are compliant with NIST guidelines and 
OPM policy.  The results of a complete and comprehensive test of 
security controls should be incorporated into each risk assessment. 
New recommendation 
FY 2019 
in 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 14 
15 
We recommend that OPM identify and define the requirements for 
an automated enterprise-wide solution for tracking risks, remediation 
efforts, dependencies, risk scores, and management dashboards, and 
implement the automated enterprise-wide solution. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 15 
16 
We continue to recommend that the OCIO develop a plan and 
timeline to enforce the new SDLC policy on all of OPM’s system 
development projects. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2013 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 16 
17 
We recommend that OPM perform a gap analysis to determine the 
configuration management resource requirements (people, 
processes, and technology) necessary to effectively implement the 
agency’s CM program. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 17 
18 
We recommend that OPM document the lessons learned from its 
configuration management activities and update its configuration 
management plan as appropriate. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 18 
19 
We recommend that OPM develop and implement a baseline 
configuration for all information systems in use by OPM. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 19 
20 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct routine compliance scans 
against established baseline configurations for all OPM information 
systems.   
Note: This recommendation cannot be addressed until 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 20 
Recommendation 19 has been implemented. 
21 
We recommend that the OCIO develop and implement [standard 
security configuration settings] for all operating platforms in use by 
OPM. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 21 
57 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
22 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct routine compliance scans 
against [the standard security configuration settings] for all servers 
and databases in use by OPM.   
Note: This recommendation cannot be addressed until 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 22 
Recommendation 20 above has been completed. 
23 
For OPM configuration standards that are based on a pre-existing 
generic standard, we recommend that OPM document all instances 
where the OPM-specific standard deviates from the recommended 
configuration setting. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report  
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 23 
24 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to ensure 
routine vulnerability scanning is conducted on all network devices 
documented within the inventory. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 24 
25 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to centrally 
track the current status of security weaknesses identified during 
vulnerability scans to remediation or risk acceptance. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 25 
26 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to apply 
operating system and third party vendor patches in a timely manner. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 26 
27 
We recommend that the OCIO implement a process to ensure 
server installations are included in the scan repository. 
new 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 27 
28 
We recommend that OPM conduct an analysis to identify limitations 
in the current ICAM program in order to ensure that stakeholders 
have adequate resources (people, processes, and technology) to 
implement the agency’s ICAM activities. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 28 
29 
We recommend that OPM develop and implement an ICAM strategy 
that considers a review of current practices (“as-is” assessment) and 
the identification of gaps (from a desired or “to-be” state), and 
contains milestones for how the agency plans to align with Federal 
ICAM initiatives. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 29 
30 
We recommend that OPM implement a process to capture and share 
lessons learned on the effectiveness of its ICAM policies, 
procedures, and processes to update the program. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 30 
31 
We recommend that the OCIO meet the requirements of OMB M-
11-11 by upgrading its major information systems to require multi-
factor authentication using PIV credentials. 
Note: OMB updated the guidance referenced in this recommendation 
with the issuance of OMB M-19-17.  As such, OPM should ensure 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2012 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 31 
its PIV compliance efforts align to the new guidance.  We have not 
adjusted the language of the recommendation and continue to roll 
58 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
forward the recommendation as the new guidance still requires OPM 
to update its major information systems to require multi-factor 
authentication using PIV credentials. 
32 
We recommend that the OCIO maintain a centralized list of all 
contractors that have access to the OPM network and use this list 
routinely audit all user accounts for appropriateness. 
to 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2016 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 32 
33 
We recommend that OPM define the roles and responsibilities 
necessary for the implementation of the agency’s privacy program. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 33 
34 
We recommend that OPM develop its privacy program by creating 
the necessary plans, policies, and procedures for the protection of 
PII. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 34 
35 
We recommend that OPM develop a process to routinely test the 
Data Breach Response Plan. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 35 
36 
We recommend that OPM identify individuals with heightened 
responsibility for PII and provide role-based training to these 
individuals at least annually. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 36 
37 
We recommend that OPM develop and conduct an assessment of its 
workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities in order to identify any 
skill gaps and specialized training needs. 
Note: While OPM has performed the workforce assessment, this 
recommendation remains open as the gap analysis to identify skills 
gaps and training needs has not been performed. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
Support Closure 
38 
We recommend that OPM conduct an analysis to identify any 
resource gaps within its current ISCM program.  OPM should use 
the results of this gap analysis to ensure stakeholders have adequate 
resources to implement ISCM activities effectively based on OPM’s 
policies and procedures. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
Support Closure 
39 
We recommend that all active systems in OPM’s inventory 
complete and current Authorization. 
have a 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 37 
40 
We recommend that the performance standards of all OPM system 
owners be modified to include a requirement related to FISMA 
compliance for the information systems they own.  At a minimum, 
system owners should be required to ensure that their systems have 
valid Authorizations. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 38 
41 
We recommend that OPM ensure that an annual test 
controls has been completed for all systems. 
of security 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2008 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 39 
42 
We recommend that OPM define a format for the reports 
communicate the effectiveness of its ISCM program.  
used to 
New recommendation 
FY 2019 
in 
Support Closure
59 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
43 
We recommend that OPM evaluate qualitative and quantitative 
performance measures on the performance of its ISCM program 
once it can consistently acquire security assessment results, as 
referenced in Recommendation 41. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 40 
44 
We recommend that OPM perform a gap-analysis to determine the 
contingency planning requirements (people, processes, and 
technology) necessary to effectively implement the agency’s 
contingency planning policy. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2018 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 41 
45 
We recommend that the OCIO conduct an agency-wide BIA and 
incorporate the results into the system-level contingency plans. 
Note: While OPM has performed an agency wide BIA, this 
recommendation remains open, as OPM has not incorporated the 
results into the system-level contingency plans. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2017 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 42 
46 
We recommend that the OCIO ensure that all of OPM’s major 
systems have contingency plans in place and that they are reviewed 
and updated annually. 
Rolled forward from 
FY 2014 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 43 
47 
We recommend that OPM test the 
on an annual basis. 
contingency plans for each system Rolled forward from 
FY 2008 
OPEN: Rolled forward as Report 
4A-CI-00-20-010 Recommendation 44 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
APPENDIX III 
  October 6, 2020 
Memorandum For: 
Eric Keehan 
Chief, Information System Audit Group 
Office of the Inspector General 
From: 
Clare A. Martorana 
Chief Information Officer 
Office of Personnel Management 
Through: 
Kellie Cosgrove Riley 
Chief Privacy Officer 
Office of Privacy and Information Management 
Office of Personnel Management 
Subject: 
Office of Personnel Management Response to the Office of 
the Inspector General Federal Information Security 
Modernization Act Audit – FY 2020 
(Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010) 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments to the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) 
draft report, the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) Audit for the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010.  The OIG comments are 
valuable as they afford us an independent assessment of our operations and help inform our 
continuous efforts to enhance the security of the data furnished to OPM by the federal workforce, 
federal agencies, private industry, and the public. 
OPM reports that the agency closed three recommendations in FY 2020, a six percent closure 
rate.  While this is a smaller percentage than last year, we have continued to prioritize and 
remediate the OIG recommendations over the fiscal year with efficiency and purpose working 
within our funding and resources.  
We agree with many of the recommendations made by the OIG and we appreciate OIG’s focus 
on continued progress toward a fully matured cybersecurity and privacy posture as set forth by 
the FISMA maturity model and underlying metrics.  This year, OPM concurs with 36 of the  
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
OIG’s 45 recommendations and respectfully non-concurs or partially concurs with the remaining 
nine recommendations.  
OPM and OIG will continue to work together toward mutual understanding of the use of the 
evolving FISMA maturity model and its underlying metrics which were first introduced in FY 
2017. 
Responses to your recommendations including planned corrective actions, as appropriate, are 
provided below.  
Recommendation 1 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM improve the 
policies and procedures for defining system boundaries and classifying the systems in its 
environment.  
Management Response: We do not concur with the recommendation.  OPM updated its process 
for defining system boundaries in FY 2020 to align with NIST SP800-37 Revision 2.  We 
implemented a pilot of our process changes in FY 2020 Q2 and completed it in FY 2020 Q3.  
With the successful completion of the pilot we implemented these changes in production for 
several systems.  A briefing was held at that time with OPM Information System Security 
Managers to outline the changes to the process and convey the updates to the forms being used.  
We are able to provide the relevant documentation upon OIG request. 
Recommendation 2 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the Office of the Chief 
Information Officer (OCIO) ensure that all interconnection security agreements are valid and 
properly maintained. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to 
provide sufficient Information System Security Officer (ISSO) support through the ISSO 
service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when appropriately staffed and funded, will be able to 
address the development and maintenance of interconnection security agreements.  
Recommendation 3 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO ensure that a 
valid memorandum of understanding/agreement exists for every interconnection. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to 
provide sufficient ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when 
appropriately staffed and funded, will be able to address the development and maintenance of 
interconnection security agreements. 
Recommendation 4: We recommend that OPM define the procedures for maintaining its 
hardware inventory. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We will aim to update 
procedures for maintaining the OPM hardware inventory.  
Recommendation 5 (Rolled forward from 2016): We recommend that OPM improve its 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
system inventory by correlating the elements of the inventory to the servers and information 
systems they reside on. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has met part of this 
requirement by purchasing and leveraging toolsets provided by the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program.  Also, OPM is in the 
process of entering FISMA system boundaries into its CDM toolset which will enable mapping 
of all assets to a FISMA system and inventory reporting capabilities within the OPM CDM 
Dashboard.  
Recommendation 6 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM define policies 
and procedures for a centralized software inventory. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We plan to expand the OPM 
Enterprise Change Management (ECM) program, enhance the software inventory, and evaluate 
the associated reporting and procedures.  Plans to utilize the recently procured Software Asset 
Management tool have been outlined, and we are in the process of implementing the tool.  We 
are targeting the development of detailed plans in FY 2021, contingent upon continued 
resources and funding at the current or increased levels. 
Recommendation 7 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM define the 
standard data elements for an inventory of software assets and licenses with the detailed 
information necessary for tracking and reporting, and that it update its software inventory to 
include these standard data elements. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  Provided that OCIO resources 
remain at least at the current levels, we will continue to improve upon the agency’s enterprise 
architecture in FY 2021, specifically regarding the agency software inventory.  Subject to 
available resources, we will first reevaluate the current posture and then develop the 
remediation plan.  
Recommendation 8 (Rolled forward from 2016): We recommend that the OCIO implement a 
process to ensure that only supported software and operating platforms are used within the 
network environment. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The ECM program and 
processes require approval for software installation.  Additionally, any time new software is 
installed on a device, OPM is able to detect the installation.  We are also actively developing 
plans to remove unsupported software and operating platforms from the network.  
Recommendation 9 (Rolled forward from 2019): We recommend that OPM develop an 
action plan and outline its processes to address the supply chain risk management requirements 
of NIST SP 800-161. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OPM will continue to follow 
government-wide guidance and standards to address this recommendation.  OPM’s Risk 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Management Council is awaiting additional guidance from the Federal Acquisition Security 
Committee, in order to develop a comprehensive strategy and plans. 
Recommendation 10 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM update its 
enterprise architecture, to include the information security architecture elements required by 
NIST and OMB guidance. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We will continue to update the 
enterprise architecture including the necessary information system security architecture.  
Contingent upon continued resources and funding at the current or increased levels, we are also 
targeting to hire an Enterprise Architect. 
Recommendation 11 (Rolled forward from 2016): We recommend that the OPM Director 
ensure that the OCIO has sufficient resources to adequately operate, secure, and modernize 
agency IT systems. 
We also recommend that the agency hire a sufficient number of ISSOs to adequately support all 
of the agency’s major information systems. 
Management Response: We note that for the Director to be in a position to ensure such an 
outcome, Congress must provide adequate resources and OMB must allocate them.  Subject to 
that caveat, we concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to provide 
sufficient ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We also recognize that ISSOs alone 
are not sufficient to adequately operate, secure, and modernize agency IT systems.  When 
appropriately staffed and funded, OPM will work to execute this recommendation remediation. 
Recommendation 12 (Rolled forward from 2016): We recommend that OPM adhere to 
remediation dates for its Plan of Action and Milestone (POA&M) weaknesses. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has instituted new metrics 
and processes for reviewing the completion of its POA&Ms which allows for timely awareness 
of slippage in the POA&M, allowing for corrective action.  While we are checking on some 
potential implementation issues with our tracking tool, we are also manually addressing our 
POA&Ms.  Once any identified issues are addressed, we will be able to provide a more 
accurate reporting of our POA&M status. 
Recommendation 13 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM update the 
remediation deadline in its POA&Ms when the control weakness has not been addressed by the 
originally scheduled deadline (i.e., the POA&M deadline should not reflect a date in the past 
and the original due should be maintained to track the schedule variance). 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OPM has instituted new metrics 
and processes for reviewing the completion of its POA&Ms which provides for timely 
awareness of slippage in the POA&M, allowing for corrective action.  While we are checking 
on some potential implementation issues with our tracking tool, we are also manually 
addressing our POA&Ms and will update the deadlines while working them.  Once any 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
identified issues are addressed, we will be able to provide a more accurate reporting of our 
POA&M status.  
Recommendation 14 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM complete risk 
assessments for each major information system that are compliant with NIST guidelines and 
OPM policy.  The results of a complete and comprehensive test of security controls should be 
incorporated into each risk assessment. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to 
provide sufficient ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when 
appropriately staffed and funded, will be able to address these concerns.  
Recommendation 15 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM identify and 
define the requirements for an automated enterprise-wide solution for tracking risks, 
remediation efforts, dependencies, risk scores, and management dashboards, and implement the 
automated enterprise-wide solution. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation but believe that no further action 
will be required based on the information provided in this response.  The Chief Financial 
Officer’s, Office of Risk Management and Internal Controls (RMIC) manages and oversees the 
agency’s Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) program in accordance with the Office of 
Management and Budget’s (OMB) Circular A-123.  This oversight includes the capture, scoring, 
calibration, prioritization, and monitoring of risks and risk mitigation strategies.  Currently, 
RMIC manages the agency’s enterprise risk profile and multiple program specific, risk registers.  
The tracking of risks, remediation efforts, and risk scores is maintained in an automated scoring 
framework using Microsoft Excel software.  The agency scores and tracks risks and risk 
mitigation efforts based on the recommended criteria in OMB Circular A-123.  A copy of the 
risk profile/automated risk tool was provided to Mr.  Scott Terry, of OPM’s Office of Inspector 
General’s (OIG) Information Systems Audit Group, on July 16, 2020.  OPM finds its current 
automated system sufficient to manage the agency’s ERM program, as do many agencies 
government wide who utilize a similar framework to support their ERM efforts.  We believe that 
the current automation tool allows OPM to manage risk information sufficiently, determine risk 
prioritization through aggregated scoring, and provide management with the information it needs 
to develop a greater understanding of agency wide risk based on a strategic review of cross 
departmental risks.  
The current tool includes the following attributes: 1) description of the risk; 2) source of the risk; 
3) date the risk was identified; 4) aggregated risk impact score; 5) aggregated risk likelihood 
score; 6) overall risk score; 7) exposure rating; 8) targeted residual risk score; 9) identified risk 
mitigation owners; 10) the risk response plan; and 11) post risk mitigation scoring and exposure 
ratings.  Combined with the monthly meetings of the agency’s ERM governance body, the Risk 
Management Council, this tool provides agency leaders with an organization-wide forum to 
consider all types and sources of risk and prioritize them based on aggregated and calibrated 
scoring methodologies.  We believe that the current tool demonstrates that risk information is 
captured, current, and being assessed in aggregate.  
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 16 (Rolled forward from 2013): We continue to recommend that the OCIO 
develop a plan and timeline to enforce the new SDLC [System Development Life Cycle] policy 
on all of OPM’s system development projects. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We recognize the need to 
enforce SDLC policy on all IT projects and plan to implement corrective actions when we can 
support such activities based upon resources and funding.  
Recommendation 17 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM perform a gap 
analysis to determine the configuration management resource requirements (people, processes, 
and technology) necessary to effectively implement the agency’s CM program. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We will work to define and 
obtain the resource requirements to improve the configuration management program.  When we 
are able to secure funding and resources, we will work to execute this recommendation 
remediation.  
Recommendation 18 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM document the 
lessons learned from its configuration management activities and update its configuration 
management plan as appropriate.  
Management Response: We do not concur with this recommendation.  The Enterprise Change 
Management Group prepares a report to track improvements to the ECM program and process 
based on lessons learned.  ECM captures the issues, makes observations, and documents the 
lessons learned.  In addition, it captures mitigations taken.  Thus, we believe that there is already 
a successful process in place to document lessons learned with regard to configuration 
management activities.  
Recommendation 19 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM develop and 
implement a baseline configuration for all information systems in use by OPM. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We are working toward 
development and implementation of the standard configuration settings for all OPM 
information systems.  We will work to implement the standard configuration settings for new 
deployments of operating platforms through enhancements to its Enterprise Configuration 
Management process in the upcoming fiscal year, based upon funding.  
Recommendation 20 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that the OCIO conduct 
routine compliance scans against established baseline configurations for all OPM information 
systems. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We plan to expand the OPM 
ECM program to include baseline configuration compliance.  We are also considering the 
feasibility of expanding our change management process to a configuration management 
process.  With additional funding and resources, we will reevaluate the current posture and then 
develop the remediation plan   We will continue to conduct routine compliance scans while 
adding OPM information systems as is appropriate. 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 21 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO develop 
and implement [standard security configuration settings] for all operating platforms in use by 
OPM. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We developed the standard 
security configuration settings for all OPM operating platforms.  We will work towards 
implementing the standard security configuration settings for new deployments of operating 
platforms through enhancements to its Enterprise Configuration Management process in the 
upcoming fiscal year. 
Recommendation 22 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that the OCIO conduct 
routine compliance scans against [the standard security configuration settings] for all servers 
and databases in use by OPM.  
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We will aim to conduct routine 
compliance scans against the standard security configuration settings as part of our Enterprise 
Configuration Management process updates. 
Recommendation 23 (Rolled forward from 2016): For OPM configuration standards that are 
based on a pre-existing generic standard, we recommend that OPM document all instances 
where the OPM-specific standard deviates from the recommended configuration setting. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO continues to take steps to 
provide sufficient ISSO support through the ISSO service model.  We believe the ISSOs, when 
appropriately staffed and funded, will be able to address these concerns.  
Recommendation 24 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO implement 
a process to ensure routine vulnerability scanning is conducted on all network devices 
documented within the inventory. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  The process and requirements 
include the immediate inclusion of the device into OPM’s routine scanning repository.  OPM 
controls all devices that are connecting to the network.  OPM will establish plans to produce 
evidence to support closure of this recommendation in FY 2021 Q1. 
Recommendation 25 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO implement 
a process to centrally track the current status of security weaknesses identified during 
vulnerability scans to remediation or risk acceptance. 
Management Response: We do not concur with this recommendation.  OPM already maintains 
procedures for conducting vulnerability scans and capturing those results in the Plan of Action 
and Milestones (POA&M).  OPM's policies and procedures with regards to vulnerability 
management and POA&M management require the application of fixes to identified security 
flaws within a specified time frame consistent with NIST standards and guidelines.  If security 
fixes are not applied within that time frame, then these controls are determined not to be 
operating effectively as designed and a POA&M is created to manage the remediation of those 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
flaws that were not fixed in a timely manner.  Allowing a time to remediate flaws before a 
POA&M is created is consistent with NIST standards and guidelines and OMB policy. 
Recommendation 26 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO implement 
a process to apply operating system and third-party vendor patches in a timely manner. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OCIO has a process for patch 
management to facilitate the timely deployment of patches.  Going forward, OCIO will work to 
improve consistency in the patch management processes through improved data collection and 
strategic process implementation.  
Recommendation 27 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that the OCIO implement 
a process to ensure new server installations are included in the scan repository. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  The process to ensure new 
server installations are included on the scan repository, via the ECM, has been developed and is 
being documented.  OPM’s full implementation will be completed based upon resources and 
funding.  
Recommendation 28 (Rolled forward from 2107): We recommend that OPM conduct an 
analysis to identify limitations in the current ICAM program in order to ensure that 
stakeholders have adequate resources (people, processes, and technology) to implement the 
agency’s ICAM activities. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  In order to meet the intent of 
OMB Memorandum M-19-17, OPM will work to establish a distinct ICAM program.  
Recommendation 29 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM develop and 
implement an ICAM strategy that considers a review of current practices (“as-is” assessment) 
and the identification of gaps (from a desired or “to-be” state), and contains milestones for how 
the agency plans to align with Federal ICAM initiatives. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  OPM will consider its actions 
to implement this recommendation once a distinct ICAM program is established.  This will 
include a gap analysis from the current state to the “as-is” assessment.  
Recommendation 30 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM implement a 
process to capture and share lessons learned on the effectiveness of its ICAM policies, 
procedures, and processes to update the program. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  OPM will consider its actions 
to implement this recommendation once a distinct ICAM program is established.  This will 
capture and share lessons learned. 
Recommendation 31 (Rolled forward from 2012): We recommend that the OCIO meet the 
requirements of OMB M-11-11 by upgrading its major information systems to require multi-
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
factor authentication using PIV credentials. 
Note: OMB updated the guidance referenced in this recommendation with the issuance of OMB 
M-19-17.  As such, OPM should ensure its PIV compliance efforts align to the new guidance.  
We have not adjusted the language of the recommendation and continue to roll forward the 
recommendation as the new guidance still requires OPM to update its major information 
systems to require multi-factor authentication using PIV credentials. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  OPM currently utilizes PIV 
authentication to access the OPM network.  However, OPM will develop project plans for any 
of the OPM information systems that currently do not support multi-factor authentication in 
order to fully implement this requirement.  This effort will require the collaboration of and 
support across all components of OPM, and is resource and funding dependent.  
Recommendation 32 (Rolled forward from 2016): We recommend that the OCIO maintain a 
centralized list of all contractors that have access to the OPM network and use this list to 
routinely audit all user accounts for appropriateness. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO has incorporated all 
contractors into the centralized tool and master user record.  However processes have not yet 
been established for routine user account audit or review.  OPM relies on support from the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) 
program to support the implementation of these requirements.  OPM continues to be at the 
forefront of working with DHS on the CDM program and will maintain this partnership as 
CDM evolves.  Additionally, with new staff on board, we will evaluate our current posture and 
confirm remediation plans by the end of FY 2021 Q3. 
Recommendation 33 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM define the roles 
and responsibilities necessary for the implementation of the agency’s privacy program. 
Management Response: We do not concur with this recommendation.  As we noted in last 
year’s FISMA audit response, we disagree with the supposition that no roles and 
responsibilities for privacy are currently defined.  We have previously cited the establishment 
of the Office of Privacy and Information Management (OPIM) in FY 2019, and have provided 
the OIG with information regarding how roles and responsibilities have evolved.  As resources 
permit, we will continue to develop and reinforce these roles and responsibilities at the Agency.   
Recommendation 34 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM develop its 
privacy program by creating the necessary plans, policies, and procedures for the protection of 
PII. 
Management Response: We partially concur with the recommendation.  As noted in previous 
years, we assert that there are currently in place the necessary policies, plans and procedures to 
foster privacy compliance and protection of PII.  We have previously referenced various OMB 
memoranda, circulars, guides, documents, and templates in place as generally reliable 
documents for OPM employees to follow.  OPIM staff readily provides guidance to programs 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
and CIO representatives in the course of developing privacy compliance documents.  We 
recognize that more work can be done to update written OPM policies, but severe resource 
constraints have led us to focus nearly all our efforts on action deliverables required by the e-
government, FISMA and OMB Circulars/Memorandums.  With the recent approval to hire one 
additional staff person, we plan to renew our efforts to update documents during Fiscal Year 
2021. 
Recommendation 35 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM develop a 
process to routinely test the Data Breach Response Plan. 
Management Response: We concur with this recommendation.  As we noted last year, we agree 
that an annual exercise to review the Breach Response Plan can help ascertain and perfect roles 
and responsibilities in the event of a breach and help to improve the risk analysis and 
appropriate mitigation steps spelled out in OMB Memorandum 17-12 and our own Breach 
Response Plan.  We have not had the resources to be able to sufficiently plan and implement 
the exercise.  While the Breach Response Plan from 2017 remains viable, we also intend to 
review and update it during the next fiscal year.  We also need to emphasize that OPIM staff 
regularly reviews reports from the Remedy system that identifies potential breaches, and 
advises the Chief Privacy Officer as necessary.  We follow up with OPM programs as 
necessary to clarify situations and recommend actions to mitigate any risks identified. 
Recommendation 36 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM identify 
individuals with heightened responsibility for PII and provide role-based training to these 
individuals at least annually. 
Management Response: We partially concur with the recommendation.  Although we assert 
that for many of OPM’s employees the traditional IT Security and Privacy Awareness Training 
is sufficient, we support the importance of role-based training for certain specialized 
employees.  In fact, we call this out in our privacy compliance guidance.  We query program 
and CIO representatives in our adjudication of the Privacy Threshold Analysis as to whether 
role-based training is required for particular program positions and what has been done to 
accomplish this.  Our assessment is that program and support organizations largely understand 
that role-based training may be needed for various positions and act on it.  At our current 
resource level, we simply do not have the bandwidth to take on any additional responsibilities.  
Recommendation 37 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that all active systems in 
OPM’s inventory have a complete and current Authorization. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The OIG found that two of 
OPM’s authorizations were signed by an agency official no longer with OPM.  We understand 
and agree with the need to have a new Authorizing Official re-evaluate authorizations in such 
circumstances.  OPM updated its processes using NIST guidance in this area, specifically 
updating our Information System Continuous Monitoring strategy.  Further details are outlined 
in the technical comments.   
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 38 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the performance 
standards of all OPM system owners be modified to include a requirement related to FISMA 
compliance for the information systems they own.  At a minimum, system owners should be 
required to ensure that their systems have valid Authorizations. 
Management Response: We do not concur with the recommendation.  We continue to take 
OIG’s recommendation under advisement and agree that system owners provide critical support 
regarding the security, through the ATO process, for their respective systems.  In reviewing the 
specific recommendation by the OIG, however, and after further analysis was completed, OPM 
has determined it will take other measures to ensure its system owners focus on the security of 
their systems.  Currently, OCIO has implemented checks and balances to provide system 
owners with the necessary information in advance of ATOs expiring; and additional analysis is 
underway to determine if specific training for our system owners is required.  Once the analysis 
is completed OPM will create a plan, including identification of resources – if needed.  
Recommendation 39 (Rolled forward from 2008): We recommend that OPM ensure that an 
annual test of security controls has been completed for all systems. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO completed an ISSO 
funding requirement gap analysis which was a critical component of OCIO efforts to obtain the 
appropriate funding.  OCIO continues to take steps to hire the adequate number of ISSOs 
through the ISSO funding model.  
Recommendation 40 (Rolled forward from 2017): We recommend that OPM evaluate 
qualitative and quantitative performance measures on the performance of its information 
system continuous monitoring (ISCM) program once it can consistently acquire security 
assessment results, as referenced in recommendation 39. 
Management Response: We do not concur with this finding.  OPM provided performance 
measures during the course of the audit period and has used those measures to maintain 
situational awareness and make meaningful improvements to the program.  Thus, we do not 
agree that this measure can only be in place after Recommendation 39 is implemented.  In fact, 
OPM measures several areas of its program, not just ongoing control assessments; 
Recommendation 39 covers just one of the areas of the ISCM program.  OPM also uses the data 
regarding the completion of its tests, as measured under Recommendation 39, as one of its 
metrics.  The lack of consistency for completing assessments as described under 
Recommendation 39 does not preclude OPM from collecting performance measures or making 
improvements to the program's effectiveness.  
Recommendation 41 (Rolled forward from 2018): We recommend that OPM perform a gap-
analysis to determine the contingency planning requirements (people, processes, and 
technology) necessary to implement the agency’s contingency planning policy effectively. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  We are aware that there are 
significant technology and resource gaps related to contingency plan testing.  We will aim to 
complete a gap analysis to document the requirements. 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
Recommendation 42 (Rolled forward from FY 2017): We recommend that the OCIO 
conduct an agency-wide BIA and incorporate the results into the system-level contingency 
plans. 
Note: While OPM has performed an agency wide BIA, this recommendation remains open, as 
OPM has not incorporated the results into the system-level contingency plans. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The agency is working towards 
the requirement to see the agency wide BIA results reflected in all contingency plans.  
Recommendation 43 (Rolled forward from 2014): We recommend that the OCIO ensure that 
all of OPM’s major systems have contingency plans in place and that they are reviewed and 
updated annually. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO will conduct a gap 
analysis and coordinate with each system’s Program Management Office (PMO) including the 
system owners and authorizing officials to help ensure contingency plans are in place and that 
the annual review and update of the plans occurs in accordance with policy.  The required 
funding and resources must be provided before we are able to effectively implement this 
remediation.  
Recommendation 44 (Rolled forward from 2008): We recommend that OPM test the 
contingency plans for each system on an annual basis. 
Management Response: We concur with the recommendation.  The OCIO will conduct a gap 
analysis and coordinate with each system’s Program Management Office (PMO) including the 
system owners and authorizing officials to help ensure contingency plans are in place and that 
the annual review and update of the plans occurs in accordance with policy.  The required 
funding and resources must be secured before we are able to effectively implement this 
remediation.  
Recommendation 45: We recommend that OPM perform and document controls testing to 
ensure security safeguards for alternate processing and storage sites are equivalent to the 
primary sites. 
Management Response:  We do not concur with the recommendation.  Security controls are 
tested as a part of the initial security authorization and on an ongoing basis as defined within 
the OPM ISCM Plan.  We recognize that some of the systems referenced by the OIG have test 
results that were not considered during the audit and others inherit controls from other systems, 
including FedRAMP cloud service providers.  The OCIO is available for continued discussion 
regarding these control tests, the test results, and additional documentation with the OIG upon 
request. 
I appreciate the opportunity to respond to this draft report.  If you have any questions regarding 
our response, please contact me if you have questions or need additional information. 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010 
cc:  
Basil Parker 
Chief of Staff 
Dennis D. Coleman  
Chief Financial Officer 
Mark W. Lambert  
Associate Director, Merit System Accountability and Compliance 
Janet L. Barnes  
Director, Internal Oversight and Compliance 
Guy Cavallo 
Principal Deputy CIO 
David Nesting 
Deputy Chief Information Officer 
Cord E. Chase  
Chief Information Security Officer 
Darrin McConnell 
Deputy Chief Information Security Officer 
Mark Robbins 
General Counsel 
Report No. 4A-CI-00-20-010  
Report Fraud, Waste, and 
Mismanagement 
Fraud, waste, and mismanagement in 
Government concerns everyone:  Office of 
the Inspector General staff, agency 
employees, and the general public.  We 
actively solicit allegations of any inefficient 
and wasteful practices, fraud, and 
mismanagement related to OPM programs 
and operations.  You can report allegations to 
us in several ways: 
By Internet: 
http://www.opm.gov/our-inspector-general/hotline-to-
report-fraud-waste-or-abuse 
By Phone: 
Toll Free Number: 
(877) 499-7295 
Washington Metro Area: 
(202) 606-2423 
By Mail: 
Office of the Inspector General 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
1900 E Street, NW 
Room 6400 
Washington, DC 20415-1100 
