 
 
 
________________________________________
________________________________________
Tony Hui, CPA, CA, CRMA
Jenny Lau, CIA, CISA
Chief of Internal Audit
Senior Internal Audit
 
 
 
Distribution:
 
Audit 
Committee, 
 
KPMG 
 
Leo de Sousa – Director, Enterprise Technology 
Carolina de Moura – Chief Risk Officer 
David Polano – Manager, Cybersecurity 
Josh Scherban – Manager, Cyber Risk 
James Andrews – Manager, Human Resources Systems and Analytics 
Sue Goddard – Manager, Human Resources Learning and Strategic Initiatives 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
January 7, 2021 
 
The objective of the audit was to assess the overall state of the City’s cybersecurity program as 
managed by Technology Services.  This did not include the cybersecurity programs at the 
Vancouver Public Library or the Vancouver Police Department. 
  
In 2020, the Cybersecurity team made progress on improving the City’s overall cybersecurity 
posture, despite additional security challenges brought about by COVID-19 response efforts.  
Processes for monitoring and responding to cyber threats and incidents have been strengthened.  
Key cybersecurity functions, such as security patching processes, identified by the NIST 
Cybersecurity Framework are in place.    
 
However, continued efforts are required to ensure reasonable maturity in all cybersecurity 
functions as outlined in this report.  During the course of this audit, Management had taken a 
proactive approach in addressing the findings identified.  The more significant findings and 
recommendations include: 
 
E.1  Develop a 3-year roadmap for the cybersecurity program 
 
The Cybersecurity team has plans to implement further improvements in various security related 
areas in 2021 and onwards to further maturity.  A documented roadmap that outlines the work 
plan and goals for key cybersecurity initiatives for the next 3 years would assist with 
coordination, prioritizing work, tracking initiatives, and reporting on progress. 
 
E.2  Ensure timely user access removal for leaving employees 
 
A coordinated off-boarding process is important to ensuring that user access is removed for 
leaving employees to prevent misuse from unauthorized access.  However, user access removal 
is not effective due to a decentralized process on notification of leaving employees.  Technology 
Services and Human Resources have previously identified this risk.  Planning is in progress for 
developing a holistic solution for employee management, including off-boarding.  In the 
meantime, additional controls should be implemented such as periodic reviews, increasing the 
frequency of the account deactivation process, and improving leaves notification by managers. 
 
E.3  Implement a City-wide cybersecurity awareness program 
 
All employees who use City technologies have a role in ensuring cybersecurity.  However, a 
comprehensive cybersecurity awareness training program is not in place.  Technology Services 
and Risk Management are working on implementing the Cyber Security Awareness Strategy.  
This strategy should be implemented with training for general, privileged and executive users.
CITY OF VANCOUVER 
INTERNAL AUDIT REPORT 
Cybersecurity 
 
 
2 of 11 
 
 
 
 
Office of the City Manager 
Internal Audit Division 
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________       
 
A. BACKGROUND 
 
Cybersecurity is the protection of information and technology assets against cyber threats.  The 
City faces increased sophistication of threat actors and increased appetite for digitalization of 
services by the public it serves.  Robust cybersecurity processes are needed to enable the City to 
deliver services securely and confidently. 
 
Three-Lines of Defense Model 
 
All employees who use City technologies have a role in ensuring cybersecurity.  More formally, 
the City has adopted the three-lines of defense model between Technology Services, Risk 
Management and Internal Audit for implementing cybersecurity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity in 2020 
 
In 2020, Technology Services was critical in ensuring the continuation of City operations through 
a number of COVID-19 response initiatives, including the rapid support of remote work from 
home.  These response efforts introduced a number of new security challenges that were 
addressed by the Cybersecurity team.  Also, the Cybersecurity team on-boarded three new team 
members in 2020 to its complement of six. 
Cybersecurity  
Three-Lines of Defense  
Technology 
Services
Cybersecurity 
Internal      
Audit
Departments  
Responsible 
Risk 
Management 
Cyber Risk 
Users 
2nd Line  
Risk Management  
 
 provides risk   
management frameworks 
and assessments 
 monitors and informs on 
emerging security risks 
 reports on the 
effectiveness of 
cybersecurity areas 
3rd Line  
Internal Audit  
 
 provides independent 
review and assurance 
 evaluates areas for 
cyber security audits 
against defined policies 
and processes 
1st Line  
Operational Management  
 
 owns and manages risks  
 responsible for 
implementing processes 
and controls
 
 
3 of 11 
In addition, Technology Services implemented new processes and tools to improve the City’s 
overall cybersecurity posture.  Major initiatives included: 
 
 enhancements to threat intelligence and event monitoring tools,  
 test of the updated cybersecurity incident response plan, and  
 progress on improving overall data and systems redundancy and resiliency.   
 
Going-forward, there are plans to continue to implement processes and tools to further the 
maturity of the cybersecurity program.   
 
 
B. SCOPE 
 
The objective of the audit was to provide reasonable independent assurance to assess the overall 
state of the City’s cybersecurity program as managed by Technology Services and supported by 
Risk Management.  The scope of this audit did not include the Vancouver Public Library or the 
Vancouver Police Department that manage cybersecurity within their respective IT departments. 
 
Our work included interviews with members of the Technology Services and Risk Management 
teams supported by procedures that included: 
 
 
review of policy, planning and procedure documents such as Application Branch 
Standards, SoP’s for security reviews, Enterprise Architecture Requirements and Security 
Operations Risk Assessment procedures; 
 
observation of processes through screen demos and walk-throughs of tools such as 
DevOps testing tools and SIEM applications; and  
 
sampling of leaving employees to confirm user access. 
 
The audit was not designed to detect fraud.  Accordingly, there should be no such reliance. 
 
 
C.  CONCLUSION 
 
Opportunities exist to further develop and mature the cybersecurity program.  In 2020, the 
Cybersecurity team made progress on improving the City’s overall cybersecurity posture, despite 
additional security challenges brought about by COVID-19 response efforts.  Processes for 
monitoring and responding to cyber threats and incidents have been strengthened.  Key 
cybersecurity functions identified by the NIST Cybersecurity Framework are in place.  However, 
continued efforts are required to ensure reasonable maturity in all cybersecurity functions as 
outlined in this report.  
 
The findings and recommendations identified have been discussed with Management and their 
responses were incorporated in this report.  We thank the Technology Services, Risk 
Management, and Human Resources teams for their assistance with this audit. 
 
 
D. RISK ANALYSIS 
 
The potential risks considered if controls were not in place included: 
 
 
disruption to systems that support critical City services; 
 
financial losses from data loss, cyberattack schemes or recovery efforts ; 
 
reputational harm from loss of trust to the integrity of City systems; and 
 
regulatory penalties from breach of personal or financial information. 
 
 
4 of 11 
 
E. AUDIT ISSUES, RECOMMENDATIONS AND MANAGEMENT RESPONSES 
 
 
E.1  Develop a 3-year roadmap for the cybersecurity program 
 
Progress in 2020 
In 2020, the Cybersecurity team implemented a number of tools and processes to improve the 
City’s overall cybersecurity posture.  There are plans to introduce further improvements to various 
areas in 2021 and onwards.  Some areas identified include security awareness training, data loss 
prevention and security, defining cybersecurity KPI’s, further improving incident response 
preparation, and further expansion on use of Splunk security information and event management. 
 
Develop a 3-year roadmap 
Given the number of priorities, a documented roadmap that outlines the work plan and goals for 
key cybersecurity initiatives for the next 3 years would assist with prioritizing work.  A roadmap 
would improve coordination, reporting on progress, and confirming alignment with the City’s 
overall technology strategy for supporting service delivery. 
 
Short-term priority should be allocated to risk areas where maturity is low or require attention.  
These areas include security awareness training and identity and access management.   
 
Consider formalized framework adoption 
In addition, while key functions defined by the NIST (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology) Cybersecurity Framework are in place, formal adoption a cybersecurity framework, 
such as the one by NIST, could also be considered.  Refer to Appendix 1 for the NIST 
Cybersecurity Framework.   
 
Recommendation: 
 
E.1.1  The Manager, Cybersecurity should develop a 3-year cybersecurity roadmap that 
outlines the work plan for key initiatives that would further mature the City’s cybersecurity 
program.  The roadmap should also include goals for desired maturity in various 
cybersecurity areas.  This should be completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
We agree with finding E.1.1 and will complete a 3-year cybersecurity roadmap by June 30, 2021.  
Consideration will be given to the NIST Cybersecurity Framework to help shape the roadmap.  
 
 
E.2  Ensure timely user access removal for leaving employees 
 
A coordinated off-boarding process ensures that user access to City systems and data is removed 
in a timely manner to prevent unauthorized misuse.  However, user account deactivation is not 
effective due to a decentralized process on notification of leaving employees.  Although managers 
across the City are responsible for notifying Technology Services of leaving employees, this is not 
done consistently.   
 
 
5 of 11 
 
To compensate for this, Technology Services relies on a leaving employees report to deactivate 
user accounts.  However, the following were identified: 
 
 
User deactivation process is not timely 
For most cases of leaving employees, where notifications were not submitted by 
departments, Technology Services relies on a leaving employees report to 
deactivate users.  This report is generated weekly.  Consequently, leaving 
employees could have systems access for up to a week after their departure. 
 
 
Incomplete report of leaving employees  
The leaving employees report does not capture all employment leaving situations.  
For example, the report does not capture employees entering retirement and 
finishing out their vacation banks, or capture situations where the employee’s 
termination date required backdating for payroll purposes. 
 
As a result, 33 employees who left the City between January and November 2020 were identified 
with active user accounts.  Upon identification, Technology Services deactivated the 33 user 
accounts and no further security issues were identified.  In addition, Technology Services began 
identifying changes to ensure completeness of the leaving employees report.  
The security risk of inadequate access and identity management related to employee termination 
was previously identified by Technology Services and Human Resources.  To address this, 
planning is underway with Human Resources to develop a holistic solution for employee 
management, including off-boarding notifications.  However, to address this risk in the short-term, 
additional measures should be implemented. 
 
Recommendations: 
 
E.2.1  The Director, Enterprise Technologies should implement a process for periodic 
review of users to ensure that employees who have left the City do not have systems 
access.  The review should be performed at least every six months.  This should be 
completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
E.2.2  The Director, Enterprise Technologies should review the frequency of the weekly 
user deactivation process to determine whether user deactivations, in cases where 
notifications are not submitted by departments, could occur more frequently.  This should 
be completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
We agree with the findings and recommendations E.2.1 and E.2.2.  The implementation of these 
recommendations will help reduce the risk in the short-term.  However, even if both of these 
recommendations are fully implemented, some user accounts may still not be disabled in a timely 
manner.  To properly address this risk, an appropriate identity and access management solution 
is required that automates the onboarding and off boarding of staff/contracts based on established 
HR triggers. 
 
 
6 of 11 
E.2.3  The Manager, Human Resources Systems and Analytics, in working with the 
Manager, Compensation and Benefits, should implement methods for reminding managers 
across the City on the timely use of the eSAF for employee terminations and the 
completion of the tasks on the “Termination of Employment Checklist”, that includes 
notification to Technology Services to deactivate user accounts.  This should be 
completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
An Aha! request has been submitted for TS to add a statement to the bottom of termination 
ESAFs directing Managers to complete the ESAF in as soon as possible and refers them to the 
Termination Checklist to ensure that accesses are deactivated for the terminated employee. 
 
The HR leadership will be asked if there is an opportunity to update all City Managers with the 
same message using the appropriate communication channel. 
 
 
 
E.3  Implement a City-wide cybersecurity awareness program 
 
All technology users play a role in security 
All employees who use City technologies have a role in ensuring cybersecurity.  Improving the 
cybersecurity practices and digital hygiene of all users helps the City reduce its risk of 
cybersecurity incidents.  However, a comprehensive cybersecurity awareness training program is 
currently not in place.   
 
Implement the Cyber Security Awareness Strategy  
Technology Services and Risk Management are working on implementing the Cyber Security 
Awareness Strategy that outlines a plan for enhancing cybersecurity competencies across all 
levels of the City including privileged users and staff in enhanced positions.  The goal is to 
implement City-wide cybersecurity awareness training in 2021.   
 
In the interim, channels such as Citywire Spotlight articles and the cybersecurity awareness 
month campaign have been used to educate and remind users of good security practices.  Also, 
targeted training was provided to specific groups in roles deemed susceptible to attacks 
leveraging social engineering techniques. 
 
Recommendations: 
 
E.3.1  The Manager, Cybersecurity should ensure that cybersecurity awareness training is 
implemented and rolled-out.  In addition, targeted training of privileged and executive 
users should also be included where risk of vulnerability is deemed higher.  This should be 
completed by September 30, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 of 11 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
We agree with finding E.3.1 and will deploy a general Cybersecurity Awareness program 
leveraging the City’s Learning Management System by September 30, 2021.  Where appropriate 
the Cybersecurity Awareness program will provided targeted training to specific high-risk groups. 
 
 
E.3.2  The Manager, Learning and Strategic Initiatives, in working with Manager, 
Cybersecurity, should ensure that cybersecurity awareness training is required to be taken 
on a regular, periodic basis by staff who use City technologies.  Cybersecurity awareness 
training should also be incorporated into the new employee onboarding process for staff 
who use City technologies.  This should be completed by March 31, 2022. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
Agree with the recommendation.  HR will work with the Manager, Cybersecurity to implement 
cybersecurity awareness training into the LMS as part of regular, periodic training and have the 
training incorporated into the new employee onboarding process. 
 
 
 
E.4  Develop a resource plan to retain cybersecurity professionals 
 
The challenges of retaining qualified cybersecurity professionals is an industry-wide issue.  To 
recruit and retain cybersecurity expertise, organizations are having to provide competitive 
compensation and other incentives.   
 
In 2020, the City’s Cybersecurity team had a turnover of 60%.  Prior to 2020, there had also been 
challenges with retaining a full team compliment.  The cost of employee turnover not only includes 
the resources spent on recruiting, onboarding, and training, but also includes the loss of 
organizational knowledge and continuity to build out longer-term programs. 
 
An alternate resourcing plan could be explored to assist with retaining cybersecurity 
professionals.  The plan may include reviewing the team’s structure to include the support of 
external services firms to provide continuity of knowledge and enable flexibility in allocating job 
tasks and duties within the team. 
 
Recommendation: 
 
E.4.1  The Manager, Cybersecurity should develop a resource plan for the Cybersecurity 
team to address the challenges in retaining cybersecurity professionals.  The plan may 
 
 
8 of 11 
include a review of the team’s structure to explore alternative models and a review of 
incentives and compensation schemes for assisting with retention.  This should be 
completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
We agree with finding E.4.1 and will develop a resource plan for the Cybersecurity team by June 
30, 2021. 
 
 
 
E.5  Determine the role of VEMA in the event of a major cybersecurity incident 
 
Technology Services updated the Cybersecurity Incident Response Plan and conducted a 
tabletop exercise in 2020.  Technology Services intends to continue to strengthen incident 
response in 2021 through the creation of incident specific playbooks and performing additional 
tabletop exercises. 
 
As incident response processes mature, Technology Services should consider the role of the 
Vancouver Emergency Management Agency (VEMA) in the event of a major cybersecurity 
incident that affects the ability of the City to deliver core services for a significant period of time. 
 
VEMA is the City’s emergency management function responsible for the City’s Emergency 
Program involving both internal departments and external agencies. 
 
Recommendation: 
 
E.5.1  The Director, Enterprise Technologies should work with the Vancouver Emergency 
Management Agency (VEMA) and Risk Management to determine the criteria for when 
major cybersecurity incidents would trigger the activation of the City’s Emergency 
Operations Center to enable City-wide coordination, cohesive communication and use of 
emergency infrastructure and processes.  This should be completed by June 30, 2021. 
 
Management Response: 
Please check one: 
Agree with the findings
 
Disagree with the findings
Please check one: 
Agree with the recommendations
 
Disagree with the recommendations
Management Action Plan:  
We agree with finding E.5.1 and will work with VEMA to define the criteria when a major 
cybersecurity incident will trigger the activation of the City’s Emergency Operations Center. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 of 11 
F. OTHER OBSERVATIONS 
 
 
F.1  Cyber Risk team on assisting with cybersecurity processes 
 
Given the resource challenges in Technology Services brought about by COVID-19 response 
efforts in 2020, the Cyber Risk team provided support to the cybersecurity program by assisting 
with the development of key areas including: 
 
o drafting of the cybersecurity awareness training strategy; 
o presenting to the Risk Management Committee on a ransomware scenario; and  
o involvement with the updated cybersecurity incident response plan and tabletop 
exercise. 
 
In the design of the three-lines of defense model for cybersecurity, Cyber Risk provides the 
second line of defense that has no operational responsibilities and “is the independent control 
function (e.g., IT risk, IT compliance) that oversees risk and monitors the first-line-of-defense 
controls.” 1  However, given the circumstances and risk of delay in the two areas that required 
attention, the Cyber Risk and the Cybersecurity teams worked together in progressing the two 
initiatives.  
 
Going-forward, the Cyber Risk team should continue to evaluate and determine whether 
involvement in design or implementation work could impact the independence and objectivity 
needed for risk assessment activities. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 ISACA, Roles of Three Lines of Defense for Information Security and Governance: Journal 2018, Volume 4 
 
 
10 of 11 
APPENDIX A 
 
NIST Cybersecurity Framework 
 
The NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) Cybersecurity Framework in the table 
below is a set of voluntary standards, guidelines and best practices for managing cybersecurity 
risk. 
 
Category 
Identify (ID) 
Asset Management (ID.AM): The data, personnel, devices, systems, and facilities that enable the 
organization to achieve business purposes are identified and managed consistent with their relative 
importance to organizational objectives and the organization’s risk strategy. 
Business Environment (ID.BE): The organization’s mission, objectives, stakeholders, and activities 
are understood and prioritized; this information is used to inform cybersecurity roles, responsibilities, 
and risk management decisions. 
Governance (ID.GV): The policies, procedures, and processes to manage and monitor the 
organization’s regulatory, legal, risk, environmental, and operational requirements are understood and 
inform the management of cybersecurity risk. 
Risk Assessment (ID.RA): The organization understands the cybersecurity risk to organizational 
operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets, and individuals. 
Risk Management Strategy (ID.RM): The organization’s priorities, constraints, risk tolerances, and 
assumptions are established and used to support operational risk decisions. 
Supply Chain Risk Management (ID.SC): The organization’s priorities, constraints, risk tolerances, 
and assumptions are established and used to support risk decisions associated with managing supply 
chain risk. The organization has established and implemented the processes to identify, assess and 
manage supply chain risks. 
Protect (PR) 
Identity Management, Authentication and Access Control (PR.AC): Access to physical and logical 
assets and associated facilities is limited to authorized users, processes, and devices, and is managed 
consistent with the assessed risk of unauthorized access to authorized activities and transactions. 
Awareness and Training (PR.AT): The organization’s personnel and partners are provided 
cybersecurity awareness education and are trained to perform their cybersecurity-related duties and 
responsibilities consistent with related policies, procedures, and agreements. 
Data Security (PR.DS): Information and records (data) are managed consistent with the organization’s 
risk strategy to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information. 
Information Protection Processes and Procedures (PR.IP): Security policies (that address purpose, 
scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, and coordination among organizational 
entities), processes, and procedures are maintained and used to manage protection of information 
systems and assets. 
Maintenance (PR.MA): Maintenance and repairs of industrial control and information system 
components are performed consistent with policies and procedures. 
Protective Technology (PR.PT): Technical security solutions are managed to ensure the security and 
resilience of systems and assets, consistent with related policies, procedures, and agreements. 
Detect (DE) 
Anomalies and Events (DE.AE): Anomalous activity is detected and the potential impact of events is 
understood. 
Security Continuous Monitoring (DE.CM): The information system and assets are monitored to 
identify cybersecurity events and verify the effectiveness of protective measures. 
 
 
11 of 11 
Detection Processes (DE.DP): Detection processes and procedures are maintained and tested to 
ensure awareness of anomalous events. 
Respond (RS) 
Response Planning (RS.RP): Response processes and procedures are executed and maintained, to 
ensure response to detected cybersecurity incidents. 
Communications (RS.CO): Response activities are coordinated with internal and external stakeholders 
(e.g. external support from law enforcement agencies). 
Analysis (RS.AN): Analysis is conducted to ensure effective response and support recovery activities. 
Mitigation (RS.MI): Activities are performed to prevent expansion of an event, mitigate its effects, and 
resolve the incident. 
Improvements (RS.IM): Organizational response activities are improved by incorporating lessons 
learned from current and previous detection/response activities. 
Recover (RC) 
Recovery Planning (RC.RP): Recovery processes and procedures are executed and maintained to 
ensure restoration of systems or assets affected by cybersecurity incidents. 
Improvements (RC.IM): Recovery planning and processes are improved by incorporating lessons 
learned into future activities. 
Communications (RC.CO): Restoration activities are coordinated with internal and external parties 
(e.g.  coordinating centers, Internet Service Providers, owners of attacking systems, victims, other 
CSIRTs, and vendors). 
 
