Risk Assessment
“identify, estimate and prioritize risk to organizational operations”
NIST 800-30
• Threats to an organization
• Vulnerabilities inside organizations
• Adverse impact which would occur when a threat exploits a 
vulnerability
• Likelihood that the impact will occur
Why are Risk Assessments Needed?
Support a variety of risk-based decisions
• Design of security solutions for information systems
• Determining who should be authorized to operate systems
• Modification of business functions to avoid a vulnerability
oChange the webpage to eliminate an attack vector
• Evaluating the utility of specific information technology products
oA product may introduce a vulnerability
Risk Assessment vs. Penetration Testing
• Risk Assessment is primarily for management
oSet policies, determine how to spend money
oTechnical details are less relevant to the audience
• Penetration Testing 
oTest and highlight vulnerabilities in security posture
oLot’s of technical detail
oNot necessarily tied to business needs
oMay inform a risk assessment
Risk Assessment Standards
• Several standards exist, similar processes
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments
• NIST Special Publication 800-30 
oCommonly used standard in the US
oVery, very thorough
oOverkill for most companies/domains
oPick and choose what is useful in your context
What is Risk?
• A measure of the extent to which an entity is threatened by a 
potential event
A function of:
• Adverse impact if an event occurred
• Likelihood that the event will occur
• Simple approximation: risk = impact * likelihood
• Also a function of my vulnerabilities
Parts of a Risk Assessment Methodology
• Risk Model – Defining risk factors and relationships among the factors
o Well-defined threats, vulns, impacts are needed to assess risk
• Assessment Approach – Choose a granularity which will be used to measure 
risk
o Continuous vs. discrete, how many buckets?
• Analysis Approach – Choose a perspective from which to consider the risks
o Threat-oriented, vulnerability-oriented, asset-oriented
o Often use multiple approaches
• Risk Assessment Process – Decide on specific steps to perform the assessment
• Prepare source information, identify threat sources, identify vulnerabilities, etc.
Risk Models
• Define the risk factors specific to your organization 
• What you need to assess
Threats – Who/what may attack your organization?
Vulnerabilities and Predisposing Conditions – What weaknesses does your 
organization have?
Likelihood – Probability that a given threat can exploit a given vulnerability.
Impact – What are the effects of a successful attack on assets
Risk - impact * likelihood
Aggregation – Grouping risks into risk classes. Helpful for communication.
Uncertainty – Must consider the error in your risk estimates
Threats
• Threat event - Any event that can hurt your organization
• Threat sources – Individuals, groups, or circumstances which may cause threat 
events
• Need to enumerate all threat events and threat sources for your system
• Specific threat sources can only cause a subset of threat events
o A system user cannot cause an earthquake
Example Threats
City Water Facility
Event: Dump stored water
Source: Enemy nation (i.e. Sandworm)
Event: Falsify billing information
Source: Individual water consumers
Power Company
Event: Synchronized activation of AC
Source: Organized Crime
Hospital
Event: Encryption of all data
Source: Organized crime
Vulnerabilities and Predisposing Conditions
• Weakness in your system which could be exploited by a threat source
o An important security control is not applied
o Old security controls are no longer effective
• Not restricted to information systems
o Recovery process not well defined
o Bad communication between groups
• External relationships may have vulnerabilities
o Cloud provider
o Third-party component not secure
Likelihood
• Combination of properties of adversaries
o Intent
o Capability
o Targeting
• Examples 
1. Kill me by controlling my Tesla
2. Steal data from a computer in my house
3. Steal data from a computer in my neighbor’s house
Impact
• How expensive would a successful attack be?
• Depends on the asset which is compromised
1. Credit card customer data – massive identity theft, loss of trust/customers
2. Hospital records – postponed treatments, loss of life
3. Proprietary intellectual property – loss of ability to compete
4. Online service goes down – Customer anger, loss of customers
Aggregation and Uncertainty
• Aggregation - Considering the impact of multiple concurrent attacks
o Earthquake and Tsunami at Fukuoka Nuclear Power Plant
o This is pretty advanced
• Uncertainty – Never have complete information
o 0-day attacks
o May try to express your uncertainty
Assessment Approaches
• What scale will be used for each measure?
o 1-10
o Red, yellow, green
o Low, medium, high
• Provide a rubric defining the meaning of each ranking
• Must provide prose description as well
o Simple ranking is not enough
Threats, Assets, Vulnerabilities
Organized 
crime
Greedy 
Individuals
Enemy Nation-
state
IC Design 
Information
Manufacturing 
Process Secrets
Process Control 
Software
Fabrication 
Network
Design 
Ntwk/Servers
Public Web 
Server
Threat sources
Vulnerabilities
Assets
•
Threats involve sources reaching assets through vulnerabilities
Analysis Approaches
• How will you enumerate all risks?
• Threats, assets, vulnerabilities
• Threat-oriented
o Enumerate all threats and consider their impact on your system
o NIST 800-30 has a pretty thorough list, and there are other sources
• Asset/Impact-oriented
o Enumerate all assets and consider everything that could happen to them
o Can limit assessment to important assets for the business
• Vulnerability-oriented
o Enumerate known vulnerabilities and think about what threats can exploit them and what 
assets can be disturbed by them
Taxonomy of Threat Sources
• NIST 800-30 provides a taxonomy of threat sources
o Table D-3
• Items in this taxonomy must be made specific for an organization
Top level
Adversarial - Individuals, groups, organizations, or states that seek to exploit the organization’s 
dependence on cyber resources.
Accidental - Erroneous actions taken by individuals in the course of executing their everyday 
responsibilities.
Structural - Failures of equipment, environmental controls, or software due to aging, resource 
depletion, or other circumstances which exceed expected operating parameters.
Environmental - Natural disasters which are outside the control of the organization.
Adversarial Threat Sources
• Individual
• Outsider
• Insider
• Trusted Insider
• Privileged Insider
• Group
• Ad hoc
• Established
• Organization
• Competitor
• Supplier
• Partner
• Customer
• Nation-State
• Threat sources are distinguished by their 
ability to do harm
o What information do they have access to?
o What resources can they use to attack? 
• These should be enumerated for an 
organization
• Enumeration is not realistic for some classes
o Individuals
Taxonomy of Threat Events
• NIST 800-30 provides a taxonomy of threat events
o Appendix E, Table E-2
• There are many possible events in the taxonomy
• The taxonomy must be pruned to match events which are possible for specific 
organizations
Top-Level Taxonomy of Threat Events
• Perform reconnaissance and gather information – Surveillance from outside
• Craft or create attack tools – Create things outside the system to perform 
attacks
• Deliver/insert/install malicious capabilities – Inject something into the system
• Exploit and compromise – Exploit known vulnerabilities
• Conduct an attack – Launch network attacks from outside
• Achieve results – Steal important data or destroy functionalities
• Maintain a presence or set of capabilities – Advanced Persistent Threat
• Coordinate a campaign – Bring large-scale capabilities to bear in an attack
Threat Events - Perform Reconnaissance
Perform perimeter network 
reconnaissance/scanning
Adversary uses commercial or free software to scan organizational 
perimeters to obtain a better understanding of the information 
technology infrastructure and improve the ability to launch 
successful attacks.
Perform network sniffing of exposed networks.
Adversary with access to exposed wired or wireless data channels 
used to transmit information, uses network sniffing to identify 
components, resources, and protections.
Gather information using open source discovery of
organizational information.
Adversary mines publicly accessible information to gather 
information about organizational information systems, business 
processes, users or personnel, or external relationships that the 
adversary can subsequently employ in support of an attack.
Perform reconnaissance and surveillance of 
targeted organizations.
Adversary uses various means (e.g., scanning, physical observation) 
over time to examine and assess organizations and ascertain points 
of vulnerability.
Perform malware-directed internal 
reconnaissance.
Adversary uses malware installed inside the organizational 
perimeter to identify targets of opportunity. Because the scanning, 
probing, or observation does not cross the perimeter, it is not 
detected by externally placed intrusion detection systems.
Reconnaissance Threat Events
Description
Specifying Reconnaissance Threat Events
Perform perimeter network 
reconnaissance/scanning
What networks are accessible at the perimeter?
Perform network sniffing of exposed networks.
What data channels (wired or wireless) are exposed 
to sniffing?
Gather information using open source discovery of
organizational information.
What organizational information is public (i.e. on a 
webpage, social media, etc.)?
Perform reconnaissance and surveillance of 
targeted organizations.
What are the physical access points? What rooms 
can be entered, seen, or heard?
Perform malware-directed internal 
reconnaissance.
What networks are internal?
Reconnaissance Threat Events
Specific Information
Threat Events – Craft or Create Attack Tools
Attack Tool Threat Events
Description
Craft phishing attacks. 
Adversary counterfeits communications from a 
legitimate/trustworthy source to acquire sensitive 
information such as usernames, passwords, or SSNs. 
Craft spear phishing attacks. 
Adversary employs phishing attacks targeted at high value 
targets (e.g., senior leaders/executives). 
Craft attacks specifically based on deployed 
information technology environment. 
Adversary develops attacks (e.g., crafts targeted malware) 
that take advantage of adversary knowledge of the 
organizational information technology environment. 
Create counterfeit/spoof website. 
Adversary creates duplicates of legitimate websites; the site 
can gather information or download malware.
Craft counterfeit certificates. 
Adversary counterfeits or compromises a certificate authority, 
so that malware or connections will appear legitimate. 
Create and operate false front organizations to 
inject malicious components into the supply 
chain. 
Adversary creates false front organizations with the 
appearance of legitimate suppliers.
Specifying Attack Tool Threat Events
Attack Tool Threat Events
Specific Information
Craft phishing attacks. 
What organizational information is possessed by each 
employee?
Craft spear phishing attacks. 
Who has critical information? What information do they 
have?
Craft attacks specifically based on deployed 
information technology environment. 
Who knows details of infrastructure? What do they know?
Create counterfeit/spoof website. 
What organizational information is possessed by each 
employee? What (sub)network contains their devices?
Craft counterfeit certificates. 
What certificate authorities do your machines use?
Create and operate false front organizations to 
inject malicious components into the supply 
chain. 
Who are your suppliers? How have you authenticated them?
Multitiered Risk Management
• Organizations often solve a problem with looking at the big picture
• Example – Ransomware attack on a hospital
oAttackers have encrypted all data. Will not unencrypt it without payment.
oSolution 1 – Reconstitute data from backups
oSolution 2 – Solution 1 + check/update all machines
oSolution 3 – Solution 2 + define a process for regularly checking machines
oSolution 4 – Solution 3 + assign money/personnel to ransomware prevention
• Risk management must be integrated throughout the organization
Tiers of Risk Management
Tier 1 – Organization
• Define mission/business functions and their (budget) priorities
• Identify critical functions and assets
Tier 2 – Mission/business Processes
• Define processes to accomplish mission/business functions
• Incorporate security requirements into processes
Tier 3 – Information Systems
• Directly protecting organizational information systems
• Choosing and using security tools
Risk Assessment at each Tier
• Risk assessments usually include recommendations
• Recommendations can be targeted at different tiers
• Rec. 1 – Hire an outside firm to handle cybersecurity
oTier 1
• Rec. 2 – Develop a process for tracking computer inventory
oTier 2
• Rec 3. – Use a tool for automatic software patching
oTier 3
